LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   J R Soc Interface
Journal of the Royal Society, Interface / the Royal Society
1742-5689 1742-5662 

17251130
1871617
10.1098/rsif.2006.0190
UKPMCPA383
Article
Mycobacterium bovis Shedding Patterns from Experimentally Infected Calves and the effect of concurrent infection with Bovine Viral Diarrhoea Virus
Kao R.R. a1 Gravenor M.B. b Charleston B. c Hope J.C. c Martin M. c Howard C.J. c a  University of Oxford, Dept. Zoology, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PS UK
b  University of Wales at Swansea, School of Medicine, Swansea, SA2 8PP
c  Institute for Animal Health, Compton Laboratory, Compton, RG20 7NN, UK
1  Author to whom correspondence should be addressed University of Oxford, Dept. of Zoology, South Parks Rd., OX1 3PS. email: rowland.kao@zoo.ox.ac.uk, Tel: +44-1865-281-986, Fax: +44-1865-310-447
20 3 2007 
22 6 2007 
22 6 2007 
4 14 545 551
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.

Concurrent infection of cattle with bovine viral diarrhoea virus (BVDV) and Mycobacterium bovis is considered to be a possible risk factor for onward transmission of bovine tuberculosis (BTB) in infected cattle, and is known to compromise diagnostic tests. A comparison is made here of M. bovis shedding (i.e. release) characteristics from 12 calves, 6 experimentally coinfected with BVDV and 6 infected with M. bovis alone, using simple models of bacterial replication. These statistical and mathematical models account for the intermittent or episodic nature of shedding, the dynamics of within-host bacterial proliferation and the sampling distribution from a given shedding episode. We show that, while there are distinct differences amongst the shedding patterns of calves given the same infecting dose, there is no statistically significant difference between the two groups of calves. Such differences as there are can be explained solely in terms of the shedding frequency, but with all calves potentially excreting the same amount of bacteria in a given shedding episode post-infection. The model can be thought of as a process of the bacteria becoming established in a number of discrete foci of colonisation, rather than as a more generalised infection of the respiratory tract. In this case, the variability in the shedding patterns of the infected calves can be explained solely by differences in the number of foci established and shedding being from individual foci over time. Should maximum exposure on a particular occasion be a critical consideration for cattle-to-cattle transmission of bovine tuberculosis, cattle that shed only intermittently may still make an important contribution to the spread and persistence of disease.

mathematical modelbacteriamacrophagestuberculosis
   Introduction
Infection of domesticated cattle with Mycobacterium bovis or bovine tuberculosis (BTB) is a global problem, important both because of its economic cost and because it is a zoonosis. While the introduction of standardised testing regimes has led to the eradication or dramatic decline of BTB incidence in many countries, BTB remains a problem in a number of them. Notably, despite a comprehensive testing regime and enormous resources spent on its control, BTB in the United Kingdom has not only persisted but has been on the increase for at least the past thirty years (Krebs et al., 1997, and http://www.defra.gov.uk/animalh/tb/stats/index.htm). A general concept is that eradication of disease is not possible for those infectious agents that persist in a wild animal reservoir. The strong correlation between areas with high prevalence of BTB in the badger (Meles meles) and a high incidence of BTB in cattle supports the argument that the two are related and that this reservoir of infection is a major reason for the continuing infection with M. bovis in the UK herd (Woodroffe 2006, Gallagher &amp; Clifton-Hadley, 2000, Griffin &amp; Dolan, 1995, Krebs et al. 1997). In New Zealand the possum has been identified as the major source of infection for cattle and eradication has not proven possible (Coleman &amp; Cooke, 2001). However, control of BTB in badgers is problematic (Donnelly 2004), and the relative roles of cattle-to-cattle and badger-to-cattle Tb transmission in the persistence and spread of BTB from herd-to-herd is uncertain. There is experimental evidence supporting the view that cattle to cattle spread does occur (Costello et al., 1998, Menzies &amp; Neill, 2000, Neill et al. 1989) and this may be important in the maintenance and spread of BTB (Gilbert, 2004, Gopal, 2006). Bovine viral diarrhoea virus (BVDV) is believed to be widespread in the UK national herd (Paton et al., 1998). There is anecdotal evidence that concurrent infection with BVDV and M. bovis can increase the severity of BTB (Monies 1999), and experimental data suggests that it may compromise diagnostic tests for BTB (Charleston et al., 1998), Therefore, we examine quantitative data describing the amount of bacterial shedding (i.e. release) from calves following experimental infection, where half the calves that had been infected with M. bovis were concurrently infected with bovine viral diarrhoea virus (BVDV), and the other half not. Some characteristics of M. bovis shedding have previously been described, including randomness and intermittency, with bacteria shed in individual bursts or episodes (Francis, 1947, Neill et al., 1988, Neill et al., 1989), however no previous report has described or analysed data that includes measures of the quantity of bacteria shed.

While no relationship between amount of shedding and infectivity has been established, it seems reasonable that a positive relationship will exist between bacterial shedding and the potential for an infected animal to infect others. Previous reports have modelled the cattle-to-cattle transmission process by assuming that all infected cattle will test positive and contribute equally to the transmission process (Barlow et al., 1996, Kao &amp; Roberts, 1999, Kao et al., 1997). Should there be significant differences in either or both of these factors then it may be that some of the infected calves make a much greater contribution to transmission than others.

Methods
Bacteria and Virus
M. bovis strain AF 2122/97 was grown in Middlebrook 7H9 broth (containing 10% ADC supplement) for 7 days and aliquots of log phase organisms frozen at −70°C. The number of colony forming units (cfu) was determined by titration on modified 7H11 agar (containing 10% OADC supplement and 4.16g pyruvate per litre) and incubated aerobically at 37°C for 4 weeks. This strain is a fully virulent Great Britain strain isolated in 1997 from a diseased cow suffering from caseous lesions in the lung and bronchomediastinal lymph nodes, the genome sequence for which is available (Vordermeier, 2002). BVDV strain ncpBVDV 11249 was used for the concurrent infection. This strain is a field isolate causing clinical signs, viraemia and nasal shedding consistent with field infections. Challenge protocols, except the route of challenge (intranasal in the cited publication) and analysis of viral infection, were performed was described in Charleston et al. (2001). A 1 mL aliquot was thawed and diluted to give the appropriate dose for inoculation. The number cfu in the inoculum was confirmed by titration on 7H11 agar.

Calves and infection model
Subjects were conventionally reared Friesian cross calves that were from a farm that had been free of BTB for &gt; 10 years and were free of M. bovis infection as judged by responses when tested in the whole-blood IFNγ test (Wood &amp; Jones, 2001). These calves were housed in a high security unit in four groups of three. All 12 calves were infected with 106 colony forming units (cfu) of M. bovis on day 0. Calves were infected with two 1 mL volumes of bacterial suspension by the intranasal route via a cannula of about 5 cm with 1 mL being delivered into each nostril (Neill et al., 1988). On day 7 six of the calves (labelled 1 to 6 in figure 1) were infected subcutaneously with 5x106 TCID50 non-cytopathogenic bovine viral diarrhoea virus strain 11249 (Charleston et al., 2001). Nasal secretions, about 0.5 mL, were collected from the anterior nares of calves via a plastic canula by means of non-invasive sterile samplers (Bibby Sterilin, Staffordshire, UK) and application of a negative pressure with a hand pump. Mucus was made up to 2 mL with sterile phosphate buffered saline.

Samples of nasal secretions that had been taken twice a week for 8 weeks were frozen at −70°C for subsequent bacteriological examination and were cultured on modified 7H11 agar without decontamination. All cultures were incubated aerobically at 37°C for four weeks and numbers of colonies counted. Suspect isolates were examined by microscopy after Ziehl-Neelsen staining. Acid-fast isolates showing typical colonial morphology were assumed to be M. bovis.

The experiment was approved by the local ethics committee according to national UK guidelines.

Analysis
Statistical Methods
A set of linear mixed models were constructed using calves as experimental units. Components of the model were analysed to determine whether there were significant differences in the shedding profiles between the two groups. Data were log-transformed before analysis and all models were constructed using the statistics package R (Ihaka &amp; Gentleman, 1996).

Models
Interpretation of these data is confounded by the problem of sampling frequency. As samples are taken only every few days, it is possible that the differences between calves may simply be due to random variation in the sampling timeframe. Therefore we explore the hypothesis that the shedding of bacteria differs only in frequency of excretion using a simple model. This model consists of three independent components: the frequency of shedding burst, the profile of individual shedding bursts over time, and the magnitude of shedding bursts.

Modelling shedding frequency
First, we assume that shedding of bacteria is associated with the bursting of individual lesions. This is modelled as a random event described by a Poisson distribution, defined by:  [1a] p(n)=e−λ(t)λ(t)nn!   [1b] P(x)=∑x=0np(n)  where x and n are non-negative integers, λ(t) is the frequency of shedding at time t, p(n) is the probability that n events will occur, and thus P(x) is the cumulative probability that there are x or fewer shedding events producing measurable quantities of bacteria when a sample is taken at time t. Thus if x=1, for example, equation (1b) describes the probability that 0 or 1 events will occur. Two different models are considered. In the first, λ(t) is assumed constant (one phase model), and in the second λ(t) is assumed to start at zero and then is a constant positive value thereafter (two phase model), i.e.  [2] λ(t)={0t≤t0λ0t&gt;t0}  where λ0 is the constant frequency after time t0.

Modelling shedding burst magnitude
The second component of the model is a fit of the average shedding profile using a simple mathematical model of bacterial replication. Here we assume that bacteria invade and multiply at an exponential rate, and thus when shedding occurs, are released at an average rate B(t). Bacterial infection and replication is initially controlled by the cell-mediated immune response, with bacteria phagocytosed by macrophages (M(t)), which proliferate at a rate that depends on the density of bacteria (20). If removal of macrophages over the short time frame of the experiment is ignored, then average bacterial shedding can be described by a simple two variable model:  [3a] dBdt=γB−ρBM   [3b] dMdt=λB  Further discussion of the models as they relate to the data is found in the results.

Modelling individual shedding profiles
If excretion is the sum of individual episodes of shedding, and each episode experiences a distinct rise and fall with finite slope, then the time past the start of the shedding episode at which a sample is taken is important for determining the quantity of bacteria recovered. Therefore it is unlikely that the amount of bacteria recovered directly represents either the maximum shedding or the total amount released. Accordingly, we reconstruct a typical episode profile by fitting the distribution of sampling at a given time with a lognormal distribution, described by  [4] Φ(log(S(t))log(B(t)))=12π∫−∞log(S(t))∕log(B(t))e−(y−1)2dy  where S(t) is the amount of bacteria recorded in a sample at time t, Φ(log(S(t))/log(B(t))) (logs are base 10) is the cumulative probability that a sample will be taken containing S(t) cfu/mL is found when the average shedding level is B(t) cfu/mL. Technically, this allows for bacterial shedding of less than zero, but in practice the variance of the distribution is narrow enough for this to be unimportant. Data at some time points are too sparse (i.e. none) to generate typical profiles or to make any meaningful comparisons between time points. Therefore we normalise the data at each time t using the expected mean shedding quantity at time t from the solution of the system of equations [3]. We assume that the shape of the profile does not change over the course of the experiment, and so for samples taken at any given time t, the ratio log(B(t))/σ(t) is constant, where σ(t) is the standard deviation of log(S(t)) at time t. That is, if the maximum shedding level in one event is 100 CFU's per mL for example, and the maximum in another is 1000, then the probability of collecting a sample when the current shedding level is 10 CFU's per mL in the first case, is the same as the probability of collecting when the shedding level is 100 CFU's per mL in the second.

Results
Identifying differences in shedding patterns between the two infection groups
The simplest analysis of the repeated measures data was to include a fixed effect for BVDV and a single random effect (intercept) for each calf (Figure 1). The estimated effect of BVDV is to increase the daily shedding by an average of 2.2 cfu, a non-significant increase (p = 0.42) which is reflected in the wide 95% confidence intervals (−0.63, 12.2). The random effects due to calf are not of primary interest here, but do show a similar within-calf variance in comparison to between-calf variance.

To explicitly model the time element of shedding profiles we included a ‘day’ covariate. A good model for the data was found to be a quadratic shedding profile with random effects terms for both the linear and quadratic terms for each calf. This accounts for between calf variation in both the timing of peak shedding and the curvature at the peak. The model provided a significantly better fit than all nested models with simpler fixed or random effects (See fit in figure 1). With respect to the fixed effect of BVDV however, the conclusions remained the same as the basic analysis; there was no significant increase in mean cfu shedding in the BVDV infected group (p = 0.72).

Analysing the shedding charactistics
Whether or not there are differences between the two groups, there remains the question of what the source of those differences might be. A more detailed examination of the temporal dynamics in the raw data (Figure 1) reveals some patterns. First, shedding of bacteria is intermittent, with bacteria recovered on some days and not on others. The intermittency appears to be calf dependent, with some calves shedding on nearly every sampled day, and some shedding relatively rarely. Second, there appears to be a rise and fall in the amount shed per sample taken over the course of the experiment.

As no significant difference was found between the two groups, the data from all 12 calves were combined in the analyses to give the maximum amount of raw data. These data were examined to determine if, in addition to the evidence for differences in the frequency of shedding, there is also evidence for differences in the maximum amount of shedding.

As the models are nested, the Likelihood Ratio Test is used to determine the appropriate model (one-phase or two-phase) for each shedding pattern. In four of twelve calves (ids. 1, 2, 4 and 9) the two-phase model was significantly better at the p=0.05 level, with a fifth (id. 6) at the p=0.10 level (Table 1). This group corresponds to calves with higher frequencies of shedding. Fitting the frequency of shedding using equations [1], calves can be classified as intermittent shedders (one-phase calves) or persistent shedders (two- phase calves). For calf 5 no shedding was detected, thus the expected frequency of shedding is zero, but there is an upper bound and only a one-phase model is consistent. While calves 3, 7 and 8 are qualitatively of similar type to the persistent shedders, models based on equation [2] cannot be used to determine the expected value of λ: since shed bacteria are detected for every sample past t0, (even though resampling might detect a gap), λ=∞ will give the best fit (note that for calf 3, no sample was taken on day 24).

The equations [3] describing the mean shedding profile were then fit to the average amount shed, considering only calves with non-zero shedding at each time point. The maximum likelihood fit of the model appears to provide a reasonable fit to the average of the data (Figure 3). Because the data are shown on a logarithmic scale, at early time points the log of the averages is less than zero (with a limit of negative infinity when there is no shedding), so here are set to zero for convenience. Note that there is considerable variation (over three orders of magnitude) in the amount recovered from different calves.

In order to compare sampling at each time point, a typical shedding profile for lesions bursting at each time t is required. The distribution is in general a combination of differences between the calves and differences in the sampling point in the shedding episode. The hypothesis explored here is equivalent to stating that differences between calves are mainly due to differences in the frequency of episodes and that apparent differences in the episodes themselves are due to the time at which samples were taken. The fitted shedding profile is shown in figure 2. The extreme shedding counts on the right are both cases where there were only one datum at the given time point (days 7 and 55), and thus are likely to be an artefact of the normalisation procedure.

The frequency with 95% confidence intervals are shown in Table 1. Simulated shedding profiles at time t are then generated by a stochastic model, described by:  [6] S(t)=B(t)×log(∑i=1P−1(R1)eΦ−1(Ri))  where S(t) is the amount of bacteria sampled, and R1 and R2 are random numbers from zero to one, B(t) is the solution to Equation [3], and Φ−1(R1) and p−1(R1) are the inversion functions of equations [4] and [1] respectively.

Using the shedding profile parameters for equation [3] for those calves classified as “persistent shedders”, and the best fit frequency of shedding for the “intermittent shedders”, 200 simulations are run, generating measured profiles for each day samples were taken in the actual experiment. Ranking simulations in terms of the total amount of shed bacteria over all episodes per simulation, excluding the top 5 and bottom 5 simulations then represent estimates of the 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for bacterial shedding. In figure 4, the experimental data for all calves classified as intermittent shedders is compared to the outputs using the frequency model that best corresponds to those data, in combination with the episode model generated from the data set comprising all persistent shedding calves. In all cases, the intermittent shedders fit well within the estimated 95% CIs for the model over the entire time course measured.

Discussion
Considerable variation was evident for calves with respect to quantity of M. bovis recovered from nasal secretions. Consideration needs to be given for whether this was due to a genuine biological phenomenon or whether it was simply a technical consequence of some unknown variability in the performance of the sampling and assays. There was a highly significant linear correlation between the extent of the lesions (lesion score as defined in (23)) evident when calves were examined post mortem and total number bacteria collected (R2 = 0.636 p = 0.002) and between the extent of lesions and number of days on which bacteria were shed (R2 = 0.522 p = 0.008). Thus, it is likely that the shedding of bacteria in nasal secretions reflect the level of disease in individual calves due to variation in resistance that is either genetic, i.e. innate or adaptive and the result of experience of other infections.

It also appears that the overall level of shedding increases for the first four weeks after exposure and then begins to decline. This is consistent with the appearance of the immune response after infection and high levels of IFNγ.(3, 4) However, shedding clearly continues after the time when IFNγ is known to be produced by infected calves. Thus, from the reduced bacterial shedding, it appears that the immune response partially controls the infection but does not clear it.

Should coinfection with BVDV result in greater shedding or a higher probability of transmission, this would be an important risk factor to be considered in an epidemiological control programme. Unfortunately, though there was some evidence for a difference between the two groups, it was not statistically significant. The power for detecting a significant BVDV effect of the size estimated from the mixed models is clearly low, given the high coefficient of variation in cfu shedding. An experiment able to detect a moderate increase in shedding with high power would require large group sizes (30-50). Taking into account the practical constraints on group size that are often faced in this field, it is important that meta-analysis across similar experiments and the pooling of data from different investigations is first undertaken. Quantitative descriptions such as are provided here will aid such analyses, as well as further experimental design.

The data are consistent with a model in which exposure results in the establishment of individual foci of infection and calves with more extensive disease have more foci. These individual foci then release bacteria into the respiratory tract and they are shed in the nasal secretions. These foci should not be regarded as being granulomas present later in the progression of BTB, that undergo the process of caseation and liquefaction that releases infectious material into the airways.(4,7) The analyses here show that differences in the shedding profiles were consistent with assuming that the only significant difference between intermittent and persistent shedders was the frequency with which shedding episodes occurred – i.e. that individual bursts of shedding of bacteria from foci produced very similar numbers of bacteria in nasal secretions on any particular occasion. Should the maximum numbers of bacteria shed on any single occasion be the principle indicator of infectiousness, and infection be more dependent on a susceptible calf receiving a single large dose, then infrequent shedders will still contribute to transmission of disease. Should however, long term and repeated exposure be important, the contribution of intermittent shedders may be less significant. Variability in response could have implications for the design of future experiments, models of targeted disease control, or the development of a cattle vaccine. It may determine, for example, whether it is more important to reduce transmission from those cattle most likely to shed bacteria, or reducing the shedding rate of all infected cattle, or whether cattle partially protected by vaccine remain a risk for transmitting disease. Depending on the which model of infectious contact is more correct, this could have wide ranging implications for the control of disease, and needs to be explored with appropriate dose-response experiments. All cattle testing positive for M.bovis are currently removed from the herd as soon as possible, and there is no recommendation that this should change. Differences in shedding could be due to chance, or phenotypic or genotypic differences in the calves. Prior exposure to environmental organisms has been reported to impart a degree of resistance to tuberculosis in humans and in animal models designed to mimic this (8). Furthermore, genetic differences, in the NRAMP1 gene have been related to resistance to tuberculosis in humans and rodent models (2, 15). Should some cattle be phenotypically or genetically predisposed to shedding large numbers of bacteria into the environment over long periods of time then to improve control procedures it would be important to identify them and remove them from the herd quickly in the short term and, in the latter case, from the breeding pool in the longer term.

Acknowledgements
This research was funded by the BBSRC and the Department of the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA), project SE3015. RRK is supported by the Wellcome Trust.

Figures and Table
Figure 1 Raw data from twelve calves, number 1-12. Horizontal axis in days, vertical access in Log10(cfu/mL). Calves 1-6 were concurrently infected with M. bovis and BVDV, calves 7-12 infected with M. bovis only. The two figures represent fitting of the two statistical models to the data. (a.) Fit of mixed model with fixed effect of BVDV and random intercept for each calf. (b.) Fit of mixed model with fixed effect of BVDV and random effects: intercept, slope and curvature for each calf.

1a 1b Figure 2 Fit of a normal distribution to the sample data. Data is taken from all calves fitting the two-phase (persistent) shedding model (calves 1, 2, 4, 6, 9). Data from any single time point is normalised by dividing by the average sample count, and the data from all time points then pooled to create the profile shown above.

Figure 3 Fit of model of bacterial growth (solid line, equation 4) to average measured log10(cfu) (dashed line). Data points from all calves in the experiment shown to illustrate the spread in the data.

Figure 4 Simulations showing fits of (a) calf ten and (c) calves eleven (hollow diamonds) and twelve (solid diamonds). Two hundred simulations were run, with the mean shown as a thick black line. All shedding patterns were well within the 95% confidence bounds of the model, indicated by the individual simulations with the five highest totals and five lowest totals (black lines). In figure 4a none of the five lowest totals have a cumulative shedding that is non-zero.

4a 4b Table 1 Fitted Frequency Values. Data are fit to two models, one where shedding occurs at fixed frequency throughout the observed period (one phase or 1P), the second where there is a shedding time delay until the first measured occurrence, after which shedding occurs at fixed frequency (two phase or 2P). The Likelihood Ratio Test is used to identify when the 2P model is significantly better (in bold, p&lt;0.10). Frequencies shown are respectively the fixed frequency and the fixed value after the time delay (95% CI's in brackets). CBD indicates “cannot be determined”, i.e. calves for which the two phase model is clearly more appropriate, but no mean frequency could be determined.

ID NO.	MODEL	Frequency	LTR Test	
1	Two Phase	2.56 (0.56, 10.7)	
                5.9
              	
2	Two Phase	1.25 (0.79, 1.88)	
                3.9
              	
3	CBD			
4	Two Phase	2.30 (1.58, 3.33)	
                3.9
              	
5	One Phase	0.0 (0.0, 0.24)		
6	Two Phase	0.45 (0.28, 0.69)	
                2.7
              	
7	CBD			
8	CBD			
9	Two Phase	1.1 (0.77, 1.5)	
                3.6
              	
10	One Phase	0.12 (0.06, 0.22)	0.7	
11	One Phase	0.27 (0.16, 0.41)	1.4	
12	One Phase	0.27 (0.16, 0.41)	1.1	

   References

          
            Barlow ND 
            Kean JM 
            Hickling G 
            Livingstone PG 
            Robson AB 
           
          A simulation model for the spread of bovine tuberculosis within New Zealand cattle herds

          Prev Vet Med 
          1996 
          32 
          57 
          75

          9361321 
        

          
            Bellamy R 
            Ruwende C 
            Corrah T 
            McAdam KPWJ 
            Whittle HC 
            Hill VS 
           
          Variations in the Nrampi gene and susceptibility to tuberculosis in West Africans

          New Engl J Med 
          1998 
          338 
          640 
          644

          9486992 
        

          
            Buddle BM 
            de Lisle GW 
            Pfeffer A 
            Aldwell FE 
           
          Immunological responses and protection against Mycobacterium bovis in calves vaccinated with a low dose of BCG

          Vaccine 
          1995 
          13 
          1123 
          30

          7491820 
        

          
            Charleston B 
            Hope JC 
            Carr BV 
            Howard CJ 
           
          Masking of two in vitro immunological assays for Mycobacterium bovis (BCG) in calves acutely infected with non-cytopathic bovine viral diarrhoea virus

          Vet Rec 
          2001 
          149 
          481 
          4

          11700926 
        

          
            Coleman JD 
            Cooke MM 
           
          Mycobacterium bovis infection in wildlife in New Zealand

          Tuberculosis 
          2001 
          81 
          191 
          202

          11466031 
        

          
            Cooper AM 
            Adams LB 
            Dalton DK 
            Appelberg R 
            Ehlers S 
           
          IFN-gamma and NO in mycobacterial disease: new jobs for old hands

          Trends Microbiol 
          2002 
          10 
          221 
          6

          11973155 
        

          
            Costello E 
            Doherty ML 
            Monaghan ML 
            Quigley FC 
            O'Reilly PF 
           
          A study of cattle-to-cattle transmission of Mycobacterium bovis infection

          Vet J 
          1998 
          155 
          245 
          50

          9638070 
        

          
            Fine PEM 
           
          Variation in protection by BCG - implications of and for heterologous immunity

          Lancet 
          1995 
          346 
          1339 
          1345

          7475776 
        

          
            Francis J 
           
          Bovine Tuberculosis Including a Contrast with Human Tuberculosis 
          1947 
          London 
          Staples Press Limited 
        

          
            Gallagher J 
            Clifton-Hadley RS 
           
          Tuberculosis in badgers; a review of the disease and its significance for other animals

          Res Vet Sci 
          2000 
          69 
          203 
          217

          11124091 
        

          
            Gopal R 
            Goodchild A 
            Hewinson G 
            de la Rua Domenech R 
            Clifton-Hadley R 
           
          Introduction of bovine tuberculosis to north-east England by bought-in cattle

          Vet Rec 
          2006 
          159 
          265 
          271

          16946308 
        

          
            Griffin JM 
            Dolan LA 
           
          The role of cattle-to-cattle transmission of Mycobacterium bovis in the epidemiology of tuberculosis in cattle in the Republic of Ireland: A review

          Irish Vet J 
          1995 
          48 
          228 
          234

        

          
            Kao RR 
            Roberts MG 
           
          A comparison of wildlife control and cattle vaccination as methods for the control of bovine tuberculosis

          Epidemiol Infection 
          1999 
          122 
          505 
          519

        

          
            Kao RR 
            Roberts MG 
            Ryan TJ 
           
          A model of bovine tuberculosis control in domesticated cattle herds

          Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
          1997 
          264 
          1069 
          76

        

          
            Krebs JR 
            Anderson RM 
            Clutton-Brock T 
            Morrison WI 
            Young D 
            Donnelly C 
           
          Bovine Tuberculosis in Cattle and Badgers PB 3423 
          1997 
          Independent Scientific Group 
        

          
            Medina E 
            North RJ 
           
          Resistance ranking of some common inbred mouse strains to Mycobacterium tuberculosis and relationship to major histocompatibility complex haplotype and Nramp1 genotype

          Immunology 
          1998 
          93 
          270 
          274

          9616378 
        

          
            Menzies FD 
            Neill SD 
           
          Cattle-to-cattle transmission of bovine tuberculosis

          Vet J 
          2000 
          160 
          92 
          106

          10985801 
        

          
            Neill SD 
            Hanna J 
            O'Brien JJ 
            McCracken RM 
           
          Excretion of Mycobacterium bovis by experimentally infected cattle

          The Vet Rec 
          1988 
          123 
          340 
          343

        

          
            Neill SD 
            Hanna J 
            O'Brien JJ 
            McCracken RM 
           
          Transmission of tuberculosis from experimentally infected cattle to in-contact calves

          Vet Rec 
          1989 
          124 
          269 
          217

          2652875 
        

          
            Perez AM 
            Ward MP 
            Charmandarian A 
            Ritacco V 
           
          Simulation model of within-herd transmission of bovine tuberculosis in Argentine dairy herds

          Prev Vet Med 
          2002 
          54 
          361 
          72

          12163252 
        

          
            Pollock JM 
            Neill SD 
           
          Mycobacterium bovis infection and tuberculosis in cattle

          Vet J 
          2002 
          163 
          115 
          27

          12093187 
        

          
            Stewart GR 
            Robertson BD 
            Young DB 
           
          Tuberculosis: a problem with persistence

          Nat Rev Microbiol 
          2003 
          1 
          97 
          105

          15035039 
        

          
            Stone M 
           
          Comments on Model Selection Criteria of Akaike and Schwarz

          J Roy Stat Soc Series B 
          1979 
          41 
          276 
          278

        

          
            Vordermeier HM 
            Chambers MA 
            Cockle PJ 
            Whelan AO 
            Simmons J 
            Hewinson RG 
           
          Correlation of ESAT-6-specific gamma interferon production with pathology in cattle following Mycobacterium bovis BCG vaccination against experimental bovine tuberculosis

          Infect Immun 
          2002 
          70 
          3026 
          32

          12010994 
        

          
            Wood PR 
            Jones SL 
           
          BOVIGAM (TM): an in vitro cellular diagnostic test for bovine tuberculosis

          Tuberculosis 
          2001 
          81 
          147 
          155

          11463236 
        

