LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   8703737
3646
Epidemiol Infect
Epidemiol. Infect.
Epidemiology and infection
0950-2688 1469-4409 

15635963
1975758
UKMS781
Article
Spatial analysis of the distribution of intestinal nematode infections in Uganda
BROOKER S. 1 KABATEREINE N. B. 2 TUKAHEBWA E. M. 2 KAZIBWE F. 2 1 Department of Infectious and Tropical Disease, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London WC1E 7HT, U.K.

2 Vector Control Division, Ministry of Health, Kampala, PO Box 1661, Uganda

Corresponding author: Simon Brooker (simon.brooker@lshtm.ac.uk)
4 9 2007 
12 2004 
11 9 2007 
132 6 1065 1071
This file is available to download for the purposes of text mining, consistent with the principles of UK copyright law.The spatial epidemiology of intestinal nematodes in Uganda was investigated using generalized additive models and geostatistical methods. The prevalence of Ascaris lumbricoides and Trichuris trichiura was unevenly distributed in the country with prevalence greatest in southwest Uganda whereas hookworm was more homogeneously distributed. A. lumbricoides and T. Trichiura prevalence were non-linearly related to satellite sensor-based estimates of land surface temperature; hookworm was non-linearly associated with rainfall. Semivariogram analysis indicated that T. trichiura prevalence exhibited no spatial structure and that A. lumbricoides exhibited some spatial dependency at small spatial distances, once large-scale, mainly environmental, trends had been removed. In contrast, there was much more spatial structure in hookworm prevalence although the underlying factors are at present unclear. The implications of the results are discussed in relation to parasite spatial epidemiology and the prediction of infection distributions.

intestinal nematodesAscaris lumbricoides
          Trichuris trichiura
        hookwormgeographical distributionspatial analysisUgandaWellcome Trust : 073656 || WT
   INTRODUCTION
Renewed commitment to global parasite control has created an impetus to attain comprehensive data on infection distribution and intensity. Once survey data have been collected they can be integrated in a geographical information system (GIS) for mapping and analysis, thus helping guide available resources to be most rationally and cost-effectively deployed. For example, the African Programme for Onchocerciasis Control (APOC) has effectively used GIS to visualize priority areas for mass distribution of ivermectin and estimate the number of individuals to be treated [1]. Knowledge of the spatial distribution of parasitic species can also improve our understanding of the spatial scale at which variation occurs and underlying epidemiological factors [2-5]. With this realization plus advances in statistical modeling approaches and geographic tools, such as geographical information systems and remote sensing [6], the study of spatial dynamics of infectious disease is ever increasing. Despite this, few nationwide data are available for intestinal nematode species in Africa, with the exception of a 1987 survey undertaken in Cameroon [7-8]. In addition, to our knowledge, there have been only two geostatistical analyses of intestinal nematodes [9-10]. The present study was carried out to describe the epidemiology and the spatial distribution of intestinal nematodes (Ascaris lumbricoides, Trichuris trichiura and the hookworms, Ancylostoma duodenale and Necator americanus) in Uganda. A further aim was to investigate both large-scale and small-scale spatial patterns of infection, thereby shedding additional light on the ecology of intestinal nematodes.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
Between 1998 and 2002, cross-sectional surveys of school children were carried out to determine the geographical distribution of helminths. No previous mass treatment had been undertaken in any of the schools or communities. Survey locations were selected on the basis of ecological differences in rainfall and temperature. These ecological zones were identified using a combination of expert opinion and ecological zone mapping [11]. Collected samples were examined in duplicate within 30 minutes using the Kato-Katz method. Participation was voluntary and had been approved by the school committee. Mass treatment of the whole school with albendazole was undertaken where the prevalence of infection exceeded 50% of the study group and specific treatment given to infected individuals otherwise. The geographical location of each school was recorded in the field by means of a global positioning system (Magellan Systems Corporation, San Dimas, CA, USA), and spatial data were displayed in ArcView (Version 3.3, ESRI, CA, USA).

To identify potential large-scale environmental correlates of large-scale infection patterns, the study investigated measures of temperature and rainfall. Estimates of land surface temperature were derived from the Pathfinder Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR) Land dataset and processed using standard procedures outlined by Hay [12]. Estimates of annual total rainfall were obtained from the Spatial Characterisation Tool (http://www.brc.tamus.edu/char/). The selection of these variables was a priori on published studies on the role of temperature and humidity influencing the free-living stages of nematode species (see ref. [13] for a review). To allow for the potential non-linear relationships of infection prevalence to these environmental variables, Generalised Additive Models (GAMs) were used to fit non-parametric functions to the relationships between the response and predictors [14]. Terms were fitted using a locally weighted regression smoother to summarise the relationship between predictors and the response. Because of the marked skewness in the raw data, prevalence (p) estimates were logarithmically transformed: ln(p+0.5).

We used semivariogram analysis to investigate the spatial structure and spatial autocorrelation in the survey data [15]. The semivariogram estimates how data are related with distance and direction, and presents the semivariance of the pairs of observations that are separated by the same distance; thus, describing how similar observations are at different separation distances (see work by Srividya et al. [4] and Gyapong et al. [5] for recent applications to filariasis). If there is spatial autocorrelation in the data, values are typically low and the semivariance increases with separation distance. Levelling out of the semivariogram indicates lack of spatial autocorrelation. The value where the semivariogram level out is called the sill and the separation distance at which the sill is attained is called the range, which is arbitrarily defined to be that distance at which 95% of the sill is reached. Where the semivariogram is extrapolated to cross the y-axis is called the nugget, which represents the micro-scale variation or measurement error. In order to provide a continuous description of the covariance structure, various spatial models (spherical or exponential) were fitted to empirical variogram points using nonlinear least squares [16]. All the analyses were carried out using S-Plus 2000 (Mathsoft, WA, USA) and its spatial analysis module, S+SpatialStats [16].

RESULTS
Data were available for 13,378 children from 191 schools in 39 of the 56 (69.6%) districts in Uganda. The age range of the study population was 5-21 years (mean 10.9 years) and the male to female ratio was 1.08:1. The mean number of children in each school was 69 (range 27-142). The overall prevalence of A. lumbricoides was 5.3% (range 0-66.7% by school), T. trichiura was 3.8% (0-45.0% by school), and hookworm was 51.6% (0-94.4% by school). Overall, 54.8% of the children were infected with A. lumbricoides, T. trichiura or hookworm.

Figure 1 shows the geographical distribution of each species by school and demonstrates that the prevalence of A. lumbricoides and T. trichiura was greatest in southwest Uganda, with moderate prevalences occurring along the northern shores of Lake Victoria and an absence of transmission in the north and northeast of the country. By contrast, hookworm was more widespread throughout the country, although prevalence was lower in northeastern regions. These distributions are likely to reflect both large-scale spatial trends as the result of climatic factors, and small-scale spatial trends as the result of local spatially variable factors.

To investigate the large-scale spatial trends and the role of climatic factors, figure 2 shows the relationships between species log prevalence and maximum Land Surface Temperature (LST) and rainfall. Generalized Additive Models (GAM) were fitted separately between each species log prevalence and each of the climatic variables. In this analysis, there was a significant non-linear relationship between maximum LST and A. lumbricoides log prevalence (F =5.7, df = 1,2.7, p =0.0002) and T. trichiura log prevalence (F = 7.2, df = 1,2.7, p = 0.001), but no significant relationship with hookworm log prevalence (F = 2.3, df = 1,2.7, p = 0.08). These trends indicate that prevalences of A. lumbricoides and T. trichiura were low (transformed estimated prevalence is &lt;5%) in areas where maximum LST exceeded 36-37 °C (Figures 2a-b), whereas hookworm was prevalent throughout the thermal range found in Uganda (Figure 2c). There was also a significant non-linear relationship between annual total rainfall and hookworm log prevalence (F = 5.1, df = 1,3.4, p = 0.001) (Figure 2f). While there was a significant relationship between rainfall and A. lumbricoides log prevalence (F =5.7, df = 1,3.4, p &lt;0.0001) and T. trichiura log prevalence (F = 7.2, df = 1,3.4, p = 0.001), there was no clear trend in the relationship (Figures 2d-e).

To investigate the small-scale spatial structure of infection patterns, semivariograms were estimated on the basis of logarithmically transformed prevalence. Initial analysis indicated that the semivariograms failed to rise to an upper bound, suggesting the presence of a large-scale trend, shown above to reflect in part climatic factors. To remove this apparent trend and ensure an isotrophic spatial process, Generalised Additive Models were fitted to log prevalence using survey locations (longitude and latitude), temperature and rainfall as predictors, and the resultant residuals were used to estimate the semivariogram [4, 16]. The species-specific semivariograms following removal of large-scale spatial trends and best-fitting lines of spatial models are shown in Figure 3. There was an apparent lack of spatial correlation or structure for T. trichiura across all separation distances (Figure 3b). This so-called ‘pure nugget effect’ [15] indicates that there is considerable spatial variability in log prevalence and that once large-scale, principally environmental, trends are removed there is no spatial structure in the distribution of T. trichiura. This also indicates that the environmental variables, namely temperature, explained most of the spatial pattern in the data. The sample variogram and fitted spatial model for A. lumbricoides showed somewhat more spatial structure than for T. trichiura but also demonstrated much spatial variability at relatively short distances and there was a lack of spatial autocorrelation at approximately 33km, as evidenced by the estimated range of 1.101 degrees (Figure 3a). In contrast to A. lumbricoides and T. trichiura, the variogram for hookworm showed considerable spatial structure up to a range of 1.1 degrees, approximately 123 km, even after removing large-scale trend effects (Figure 3c). This result also indicates that factors other than rainfall are influencing the spatial structure of hookworm prevalence.

DISCUSSION
Knowledge of the spatial epidemiology of parasitic infection is important from the viewpoints of both planning surveys and scientific understanding of parasite transmission and epidemiology [2,3,5]. This study represents one of the first detailed investigations of the spatial epidemiology of intestinal nematodes on a national level. The use of geostatistical and mapping techniques, in combination with remote sensing satellite sensor and interpolated climate surfaces, enabled the investigation of both large-scale and small-scale spatial patterns in Uganda. It is important to note that data were collected over a relatively short time period (4 years) and that no previous large-scale treatment programmes have been undertaken, thus reducing potentially confounding secular effects.

An important finding of this study is that large-scale environmental factors influence large-scale infection patterns. In particular, temperature was significantly associated with the prevalence of A. lumbricoides and T. trichiura such that prevalence was generally &lt;5% in areas where maximum land surface temperature exceeded 36-37 °C. By contrast, hookworm occurred throughout the thermal range found in Uganda (30.3-50.8 °C). This species-specific difference in thermal limits is similar to that found elsewhere in Africa. In Cameroon, for example, prevalences of A. lumbricoides and T. trichiura are shown to be greatest in the southern equatorial zone and lowest in the so-called Sahara and Sudan tropical zones [7], where maximum land surface temperature exceeds 37-40 °C [17]. Extreme thermal conditions are also suggested to prevent transmission of A. lumbricoides and T. trichiura in Chad [18]. Hookworm, by contrast, occurs throughout Cameroon [8] and much of Chad [18] suggesting hookworm has wider thermal distribution limits than either A. lumbricoides or T. trichiura.

The biological explanation for these findings can be based on an understanding of the parasites’ life cycles. The life cycles of intestinal nematodes are direct. Eggs are produced by mature adults growing in their human host and are shed in human faeces. After a period of development in the external environment, infection with A. lumbricoides or T. trichiura occurs via ingestion of infective ova and infection of hookworm larvae typically occurs through penetration of the skin. The microclimatic requirements for embryonation and survival of nematode ova and larvae, principally in terms of temperature and moisture, have been extensively studied under laboratory conditions [19-23]. These studies show that rates of embryonation and survival are temperature dependent and optimum conditions have been defined between 28 and 32 °C, with development of A. lumbricoides and T. trichiura arresting between 5 and 38 °C [19-20], and development of hookworm larvae ceases at 40 °C [21]. The apparent ability of hookworm to survive hotter conditions can be explained in part by its ability to find suitable thermal and moisture conditions. In particular, whereas the ova of A. lumbricoides and T. trichiura are non-motile, hookworm larvae stages have limited motility and therefore, although high surface temperatures may cause ova to die from desiccation, hookworm larvae can migrate downward into the soil, thereby avoiding desiccation [24].

In addition to temperature, soil moisture and relative atmospheric humidity are known to influence the development and survival of ova and larvae: higher humidities are associated with faster development of ova; and at low humidity the ova of A. lumbricoides and T. trichiura do not embryonate [22-23]. Humidity is inversely correlated with temperature, such that high temperatures are associated with humidities too low for embryonation. In addition, since rainfall is positively correlated with atmospheric humidity it is unsurprising that annual rainfall has been shown to be associated with prevalence patterns. Studies from West Africa suggest that a minimum of 1400 mm annual rainfall is necessary for the prevalence of A. lumbricoides to exceed 10% [13, 25]. In Uganda, by contrast, prevalence greater than 10% is observed in areas with an annual rainfall between 1000-1400 mm. This apparent regional difference may reflect differential moisture retention of varying types of vegetation and land-use that occur in East and West Africa. The observed association between hookworm prevalence and rainfall corroborates earlier findings from East Africa [26]. These observational studies are interpretable by work by Nwosu and Anya [27] who found that the abundance of hookworm larvae available in the environment is related to a derived wetness index.

Thus, our observed statistical relationships are consistent and interpretable with the known biology of intestinal nematodes, and provide justification for using climate variables in identifying large-scale distributional limits of transmission. The finding that a few climatic factors influence the boundaries of transmission has been demonstrated for other parasites and their vectors. For example, satellite-derived maximum monthly temperature appeared to determine alone the distribution of the tsetse fly, Glossina morsitans (vector for African trypanosomiases) at its edge of its continental range [28].

The impact of other factors, such as variability in human behaviour, including personal hygiene, as well as differences in sanitation and socio-economic status, are undoubtedly important in influencing local transmission patterns but we suggest are unlikely to influence the large-scale limits of transmission in a manner similar to climatic factors. Rather such non-climactic factors will influence small-scale patterns, evident within environmentally determined, distributional limits. Such a suggestion is confirmed by our application of geostatistical techniques [15] which indicated that once large-scale trends - so-called first-order effects - were removed, T. trichiura prevalence in Uganda indicated no small-scale spatial structure and that A. lumbricoides prevalence showed much smaller-scale spatial dependency than hookworm prevalence. These findings confirm the suggestion that climatic variables influence large-scale trends in prevalence of A. lumbricoides and T. trichiura, but that there exists considerable local stochastic spatial variation, due presumably to unobserved differences in personal hygiene, sanitation and socio-economic status.

Consequently, large-scale distributions of A. lumbricoides and T. trichiura, therefore, may be predicted on the basis of remotely sensed environmental factors, as has been showed previously for Cameroon [17], but that small-scale distributions may not. This is because these species showed little or no spatial structure at local scales. The ability to predict large-scale but not small-scale patterns has recently been emphasized for Schistosoma haematobium [11]. In contrast, hookworm prevalence showed considerably more spatial correlation structure, so-called second-order effects. Why there is this spatial structure in hookworm prevalence is at present unclear, but there appears to be locally important spatial structuring factors. Mindful of the central importance of scale [29-30], further investigations at varying spatial scales are required to better understand spatial structure of hookworm and underlying epidemiological factors. The prediction of hookworm spatial patterns has not previously been possible on the basis of large-scale environmental factors [17], but the spatial structure evidenced here suggests that prediction may be possible if underlying epidemiological factors can be identified and mapped. Previous study in South Africa, for example, found a strong association between patterns of hookworm infection and soil type and satellite sensor-derived normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) [9].

Alternatively, spatial interpolation methods such as kriging to estimate hookworm prevalence at any point from the observed data may be possible on the basis of spatially detailed stratified hookworm samples. For filariasis, the World Health Organization proposes a sampling grid of 25 × 25 km for the rapid mapping of filariasis antigenemia prevalence [5, 31], although this has been questioned [4]. The present results suggest that a similar sampling design could usefully be adopted for hookworm, but that different sampling frames are ideally required for A. lumbricoides or T. trichiura if spatial variability in prevalence is to be adequately captured. However, this is clearly offset against the practical convenience of combining surveys of intestinal species.

The current study, which forms part of ongoing work to better define the distribution of intestinal nematodes in Africa, has highlighted the role that generalized additive modelling and geostatistics can play in investigating both large- and small-scale spatial infection patterns. Such an approach can usefully be applied to other settings, as well as other parasitic species and contribute towards improving our understanding of the spatial ecology of parasites and the contribution this knowledge can have for the sampling plans of future surveys.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Division of Vector Control technicians and to our data manager Jackson Rwaheru for their hard work and enthusiasm, and extend sincere thanks to the schoolchildren, teachers and community members who participated in the study. Fieldwork received financial support from the Danish Bilharziasis Laboratory, World Health Organization, World Food Programme and the Wellcome Trust (through its provision of an Advanced Training Fellowship to SB (062692)). The satellite data used in this study include data produced through funding from the Earth Observing System Pathfinder Program of NASA’s Mission to Planet Earth in cooperation with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The data were provided by the Earth Observing System Data and Information System (EOSDIS), Distributed Active Archive Center (DAAC) at Goddard Space Flight Center which archives, manages and distributes this dataset. We thank Simon Hay for processing these data. Finally, we thank the Director General of Health Services for giving us permission to publish the results.

IN PRESS: Epidemiology and Infection

Figure 1 Geographical distribution of A. lumbricoides (a), T. trichiura (b), and hookworm (c) in 195 schools in Uganda.

Figure 2 Relationships between log prevalence of A. lumbricoides (a, d), T. trichiura (b, e), and hookworm (c, f) and climatic variables. Each plot shows the relationship of the fitted function to the response variable and scaled to zero. Points represent observed relationship and solid lines represent fitted Generalized Additive Model to the log prevalence data using maximum land surface temperature (maxlst) and total annual rainfall.

Figure 3 Omnidirectional semivariograms and best-fitted lines of exponential spatial models for de-trended log prevalence data based on Generalized Additive Model residuals of longitude, latitude, rainfall and maximum land surface temperature from 191 schools in Uganda for (a) A. lumbricoides, (b) T. trichiura and (c) hookworm. Parameter values of the fitted spatial model for A. lumbricoides were range=0.2194271, sill=0.1276312, nugget=0.0565912; and for hookworm were range=0.983877, sill=0.03317698, nugget=0.02842463. No spatial model could be developed for T. trichiura because of the lack of spatial structure in the semivariogram values. Directional semivariograms did not differ from the omnidirectional variograms and therefore an isotrophic spatial process was assumed, and omnidirectional variograms presented.


   REFERENCES
1 Noma M  Nwoke BEB  Nutall I    Rapid epidemiology mapping of onchocerciasis (REMO): its application by the African Programme for Onchocerciasis Control (APOC) Ann Trop Med Parasitol 2002 96 S29 S39 12081248 
2 Kitron U   Risk maps: transmission and burden of vector-borne diseases Parasitol Today 2000 16 324 325 10900476 
3 Hess G  Randolph SE  Arneberg P    Hudson PJ  Rizzoli AP  Grenfell BT  Heesterbeek JAP  Dobson AP   Spatial aspects of disease dynamics The Ecology of Wildlife Diseases 2001 102 118 Oxford Oxford University Press 
4 Srividya A  Michael E  Palaniyandi M  Pani SP  Das PK   A geostatistical analysis of the geographic distribution of lymphatic filariasis prevalence in southern India Am J Trop Med Hyg 2002 67 480 489 12479548 
5 Gyapong JO  Kyelem D  Kleinschmidt I    The use of spatial analysis in mapping the distribution of bancroftian filariasis in four West African countries Ann Trop Med Parasitol 2002 96 695 705 12537631 
6 Hay SI  Randolph SE  Rogers DJ   Remote Sensing and Geographical Information Systems in Epidemiology 2000 London Academic Press 
7 Ratard RC  Kouemeni LE  Bessala MME  Ndamkou CN  Sama MT  Cline BL   Ascariasis and trichuriasis in Cameroon Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1991 85 84 88 2068772 
8 Ratard RC  Kouemeni LE  Ekani Bessala MK  Ndamkou CN   Distribution of hookworm infection in Cameroon Ann Trop Med Parasitol 1922 86 413 418 1463363 
9 Saathoff E   Geohelminth and Schistosoma haematobium infection in schoolchildren from rural northern KwaZulu-Natal/South Africa. PhD Thesis 2002 Charlottenlund and Copenhagen Danish Bilarziasis Laboratory and University of Copenhagen 
10 Campos MR  Valencia LIO  Fortes BPMD  Braga RCC  Medronho RA   Spatial distribution of Ascaris lumbricoides infection Rev Saúde Púb 2002 36 69 74 11887232 
11 Brooker S  Hay SI  Bundy DAP   Tools from ecology: useful for evaluating infection risk models? Trends Parasitol 2002 18 70 74 11832297 
12 Hay SI   An overview of remote sensing and geodesy for epidemiology and public health applications Adv Parasitiol 2000 47 2 27 
13 Brooker S  Michael E   The potential of geographical information systems and remote sensing in the epidemiology and control of human helminth infections Adv Parasitol 2000 47 245 288 10997209 
14 Venables WN  Ripley BD   Modern Applied Statistics with S-Plus 1999 New York Springer-Verlag 
15 Bailey TC  Gatrell AC   Interactive spatial data analysis 1995 Harlow, England Longman 
16 Kaluzny SP  Vega SC  Cardoso TP  Shelly AA   S+SpatialStats. User’s manual for Windows and UNIX 1998 New York Springer-Verlag 
17 Brooker S  Hay SI  Tchuem Tchuenté LA  Ratard R   NOAA-AVHRR data to model helminth distributions for planning disease control in Cameroon, West Africa Photo Eng Rem Sen 2002 68 175 179 
18 Brooker S  Beasley NMR  Ndinaromtan M  Madjiouroum EM  Baboguel M  Djenguinabe E  Hay SI  Bundy DAP   Use of remote sensing and a geographical information system in a national helminth control programme in Chad Bull WHO 2000 80 783 789 12471398 
19 Beer RJ   The relationship between Trichuris trichiura  (Linnaeus 1758) of man and Trichuris suis  (Schrank 1788) of the pig Res Vet Sci 1976 20 47 54 1257627 
20 Seamster AP   Developmental studies concerning the eggs of Ascaris lumbricoides var. suum The Am Mid Nat 1950 43 450 468 
21 Smith G  Schad GA   Ancylostoma duodenale  and Necator americanus : effect of temperature on egg development and mortality Parasitol 1989 99 127 132 2797868 
22 Otto GF   A study of the moisture requirements of the eggs of the horse, the dog, human and pig ascarids Am J Hyg 1929 10 497 520 
23 Spindler LA   The relation of moisture to the distribution of human trichuris and ascaris Am J Hyg 1929 10 476 496 
24 Beaver PC   Persistence of Hookworm Larvae in Soil Am J Trop Med Hyg 1953 2 102 108 13007930 
25 Prost A   L’ascaridiose en Afrique de l’ouest. Revue épidémiologique Ann Parasitol Humaine Comparee 1987 62 434 455 
26 Miller TA   Studies on the incidence of hookworm in East Africa E Afr Med J 1970 47 355 363 5528227 
27 Nwosu ABC  Anya AO   Seasonality in human hookworm infection in an endemic area of Nigeria, and its relationship to rainfall Tropenmed Parasitol 1980 31 201 208 7414677 
28 Rogers DJ   Satellites, space, time and the African Trypanosomiases Adv Parasitol 2000 47 129 171 10997206 
29 Levin SA   The problem of pattern and scale in ecology Ecology 1992 73 1943 1967 
30 Kennedy CR  Bush AO   The relationship between pattern and scale in parasite communities: a stranger in a strange land Parasitol 1994 109 187 196 8084664 
31  World Health Organization  
Research on Rapid Geographical Assessment of Bancroftian Filariasis 
TDR/TDF/COMDT 98.2
1999 
 Geneva 
 WHO 


