LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   100962779
22269
Nat Rev Genet
Nat. Rev. Genet.
Nature reviews. Genetics
1471-0056 1471-0064 

15861210
1762815
10.1038/nrg1606
UKMS5811
Article
MITOCHONDRIAL DNA MUTATIONS IN HUMAN DISEASE
Taylor Robert W.  Turnbull Doug M.  Mitochondrial Research Group, School of Neurology, Neurobiology and Psychiatry, The Medical School, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to D.M.T. e-mail: d.m.turnbull@ncl.ac.uk
27 9 2006 
5 2005 
04 1 2007 
6 5 389 402
This file is available to download for the purposes of text mining, consistent with the principles of UK copyright law.The human mitochondrial genome is extremely small compared with the nuclear genome, and mitochondrial genetics presents unique clinical and experimental challenges. Despite the diminutive size of the mitochondrial genome, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations are an important cause of inherited disease. Recent years have witnessed considerable progress in understanding basic mitochondrial genetics and the relationship between inherited mutations and disease phenotypes, and in identifying acquired mtDNA mutations in both ageing and cancer. However, many challenges remain, including the prevention and treatment of these diseases. This review explores the advances that have been made and the areas in which future progress is likely.

Wellcome Trust : 074454 || WT
   Until recently, mitochondrial genetics and diseases that are due to defects in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) were often considered to be curiosities, outside mainstream genetics. These views were not helped by the different genetic rules by which mtDNA is inherited compared with nuclear DNA, the presence of several mtDNA copies in individual cells and a belief that mtDNA disease is rare. In addition, the clinical syndromes caused by mtDNA mutations have variable phenotypes and are often described by instantly forgettable eponyms or acronyms1. These views perhaps ignore the fact that the mitochondrial genome is central to the study of evolutionary genetics, has an important role in forensic medicine2 and that the human, bovine and mouse mitochondrial genomes were the first mammalian genomes to be completely sequenced3–5.

The increasing ease with which the mitochondrial genome can be analysed, and the availability of a consensus human sequence6, have both helped to recognize mtDNA disorders as a frequent cause of genetic disease. It is difficult to estimate the true prevalence of mtDNA disease owing to its many clinical guises, presentations and the involvement of numerous causative mutations. Data on a single-point mutation (3243A&gt;G) in Finland indicate that approximately 1 in 6,000 individuals are affected, whereas estimates from the British population intimate that about 1 in 3,500 people either have mtDNA disease or are at risk of developing it7,8. These estimates do not include the recent apparent association of mtDNA mutations and common clinical features (for example, hypertension)9, which indicate that the incidence could be higher still. In addition, there is increasing evidence from animal models10 and human studies11 that acquired mtDNA mutations and mitochondrial dysfunction are involved in ageing and age-related diseases such as diabetes12,13. Although our present knowledge already indicates that mtDNA mutations are an important cause of disease, the true impact of these mutations on human health remains to be determined.

This review focuses on abnormalities of the mitochondrial genome in relation to human disease. Mitochondrial disease can also arise from nuclear gene disorders because most proteins involved in mitochondrial metabolism and all those involved in mtDNA maintenance are nuclear-encoded. Mutations in these nuclear genes can mimic the features seen in patients with mtDNA defects, and indeed some nuclear genetic disorders result in secondary abnormalities of the mitochondrial genome. Excellent reviews describe the defects that are due to mutations in nuclear genes that are involved in mitochondrial oxidative metabolism1,14,15. Here we review our current understanding of the role of mtDNA in human disease and highlight areas that are either controversial or merit further studies. We first review the basic features of mitochondrial genetics. Much progress has been made in this area and a clear understanding is important to further our knowledge of the diagnosis, pathogenesis and treatment of mtDNA disease. We then turn to clinical syndromes that are due to mtDNA mutations, recognizing that mtDNA mutations might cause various clinical features, which often makes diagnosis a considerable challenge. Even when diagnosed, there is no curative treatment for patients who have mtDNA disease. Nonetheless, there are several experimental possibilities to either prevent transmission or to correct the genetic defect and these are discussed here. Although models of mtDNA disease exist, these are predominantly cell-based rather than transgenic mouse models. Some valuable models are available, but few mimic the characteristics of pathogenic mtDNA mutations. We conclude by considering the possible role of the mitochondrial genome in ageing, which, despite much speculation, has only recently been supported by firm evidence from an animal model.

Mitochondrial genetics: the basics
Mitochondria are found in all nucleated cells and are the principal generators of cellular ATP by oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), incorporating the electron-transferring respiratory chain (complexes I–IV) and the ATP synthase (complex V). Mitochondria are the only location of extra-chromosomal DNA within the cell (except in plant chloroplasts), and they are under the dual genetic control of both nuclear DNA and the mitochondrial genome. The mitochondrial genome consists of a multicopy, circular dsDNA molecule (16.6 kb in humans), which encodes 13 essential polypep-tides of the OXPHOS system and the necessary RNA machinery (2 rRNAs and 22 tRNAs) for their translation within the organelle (FIG. 1). The remaining protein subunits that make up the respiratory-chain complexes, together with those required for mtDNA maintenance, are nuclear-encoded, synthesized on cytoplasmic ribosomes, and are specifically targeted and sorted to their correct location within the organelle.

Mitochondrial genetics is different from Mendelian genetics in almost every aspect, from the uniparental inheritance of disease mutations, to the presence of many copies of the genome within a single cell and the basic mechanisms that underlie replication and control of transcription (TABLE 1). The differences between the two genetic systems that are in human cells are probably a relic of evolution16, but lead to some fascinating biology that dictates the functional consequences of mtDNA mutations.

Replication, transcription and translation of mitochondrial DNA
Both replication and transcription are important in terms of understanding the development of mtDNA mutations and their biochemical consequences. There is now good evidence to indicate that the minimal mitochondrial replisome17 consists of several proteins. These include: the heterodimeric mtDNA polymerase γ, which consists of a catalytic subunit with proof-reading ability (PolgA) and a processivity subunit (PolgB)18, Twinkle, which has 5′–3′ DNA helicase activity19, and a mitochondrial single-stranded binding protein. Together with mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), these proteins associate with mtDNA to form structures that are termed NUCLEOIDS, which are believed to be the units of mtDNA transmission and inheritance.

NUCLEOID

A dynamic complex that consists of several copies of mitochondrial DNA and key maintenance proteins within the organelle.

POLYCISTRONIC

A form of gene organization that results in transcription of an mRNA that codes for multiple gene products, each of which is independently translated from the mRNA.

The mode of mtDNA replication has recently become the subject of much debate. On the basis of ultrastructural and biochemical analyses, mtDNA replication had been considered to occur by a strand-displacement model20, in which replication of the leading (heavy (H)) strand occurs first, initiating at a specific site (called OH) in the non-coding control region (FIG. 1). When leading-strand replication has reached two-thirds around the genome, the origin of replication (OL) on the lagging (light (L)) strand is exposed, allowing L-strand synthesis to occur in the opposite direction. Recent studies using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis challenge this model by providing evidence, in human, mouse and avian tissues, of a more conventional replication mechanism in which leading-lagging strand DNA replication is coordinated21–23. The two modes of replication have been hotly debated24–26 and the recent description of another D-loop origin of replication adds further interest to this debate27. Nascent chains that start at this origin do not terminate prematurely and seem to be mainly responsible for mtDNA maintenance under steady-state conditions.

Our understanding of the transcriptional machinery in mammalian mitochondria has improved, predominantly owing to the identification of specific proteins and the development of an in vitro system to dissect out the regulatory features28. In human mtDNA, transcriptional initiation can occur on both strands. Transcription from the mitochondrial promoters produces a POLYCISTRONIC precursor RNA that is then processed to produce individual tRNA and mRNA molecules29,30. To initiate transcription, the dedicated mitochondrial RNA polymerase (POLRMT) requires TFAM, and either mitochondrial transcription factor B1 (TFB1M) or B2 (TFB2M)31,32. Recent evidence shows that TFAM induces a structural change of the light-strand promoter that is required for POLRMT-dependent promoter recognition33. The importance of mitochondrial transcription to cellular dysfunction as a result of pathogenic mtDNA mutations is a neglected area of research that might give important insights into some of the tissue-specific or mutation-specific effects.

The mRNAs for the 13 mtDNA-encoded OXPHOS proteins are translated on mitochondrial ribosomes. Mutations in mitochondrial tRNA or rRNA genes affect pathology by disrupting mitochondrial translation34 and recent research has concentrated on identifying nuclear factors, including mitochondrial ribosomal proteins (MRPs), that are essential for this process. The first mutations in these nuclear genes, including MRPS16 (mitochondrial ribosomal protein S16)35 and EFG1 (officially known as GFM1; G elongation factor, mitochondrial 1)36 have recently been described in consanguineous families that have generalized mitochondrial translation defects.

Homoplasmy and heteroplasmy
The polyploid nature of the mitochondrial genome — up to several thousand copies per cell — gives rise to an important feature of mitochondrial genetics, homoplasmy and heteroplasmy. In simple terms, homoplasmy is when all copies of the mitochondrial genome are identical; heteroplasmy is when there is a mixture of two or more mitochondrial genotypes. The value of these terms is apparent when we consider mtDNA mutations that lead to disease. Some mutations affect all copies of the mitochondrial genome (homoplasmic mutation), whereas others are only present in some copies of the mitochondrial genome (heteroplasmic mutation). In the presence of heteroplasmy, there is a threshold level of mutation that is important for both the clinical expression of the disease and for biochemical defects, as routinely demonstrated by the cytochemical assessment of cytochrome c oxidase (COX; complex IV) activity in an individual cell (FIG. 2). Numerous single-cell and TRANSMITOCHONDRIAL CYBRID CELL studies have shown that the mutated form is functionally recessive and that a biochemical phenotype is associated with high levels of mutation above a crucial threshold37.

TRANSMITOCHONDRIAL CYBRID

Derived from the term ‘cytoplasmic hybrid’. A cell line that is used to study the pathophysiological consequences of any given mitochondrial DNA mutation in a control nuclear background. Cybrids are generated by fusing patient cytoplasts (enucleated cells that contain mitochondria) with a cell line that lacks mitochondrial DNA.

The concept of homoplasmy is more apparent than real. In most individuals there is no evidence of heteroplasmy, but all available evidence indicates that mtDNA is constantly undergoing mutation, with clonal expansion or loss of either point mutations or deletions38,39. Because these acquired mutations occur at random, all acquired mutations will be present at a low level and therefore might not be detected in a tissue homogenate or blood sample. Perhaps we should only use ‘homoplasmy’ to describe a state in which we cannot detect these acquired mutations, although it would be naive to think that all mitochondrial genomes within an individual, tissue or even a cell are identical.

Inheritance of mitochondrial DNA
The standard model of mtDNA inheritance is that it is transmitted strictly through the maternal line40 and that mtDNA lineages are therefore clonal. However, this model has recently been challenged. Low levels of paternal transmission of mtDNA have been observed in crosses between mouse species, but not within species41, although further studies showed that this paternal mtDNA was not transmitted to the subsequent generation42. In addition, there is evidence that recombination has contributed to the distribution of mtDNA polymorphisms within the human population43. Although recombination might occur at the cellular level44,45, the occurrence of recombination within the population is contentious46. Studies of a patient with mitochondrial myopathy — who carried a novel, 2-bp pathogenic deletion in the NADH (reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) dehydrogenase subunit 2 (ND2) gene in his muscle mtDNA — have also challenged the maternal inheritance of mtDNA47. Using haplotype analysis, this sporadic mutation was present in paternally derived mtDNA, although the deletion itself was not evident in the father’s mtDNA. With the exception of skeletal muscle, all other tissues contained a single, maternally derived mtDNA haplotype. Subsequent studies of other patients with mitochondrial myopathies have not shown any evidence of paternal transmission48–50, even when assisted reproduction techniques were applied51,52.

LEBER HEREDITARY OPTIC NEUROPATHY

A mitochondrial disease that is characterized by optic nerve dysfunction, which leads to bilateral visual failure in young adults.

GENETIC BOTTLENECK

A temporary reduction in population size that causes the loss of genetic variation.

Mitochondrial DNA transmission
The current genetic advice is that fathers with mtDNA mutations are at no risk of transmitting the defect to their offspring. Maternal transmission of mutated mtDNA occurs, but the risk depends on the type of mutation and possibly the segregation of the mutation within maternal tissues. Identifying specific mtDNA mutations and investigating family members for evidence of transmission will give guidance to the likelihood of transmission through the germline. Detailed studies of large patient cohorts provide invaluable information on the risk of transmission. A recent analysis of a single, large-scale mtDNA deletion in 226 families, showed that the risk of recurrence in the offspring of an affected mother was 4.11% (REF. 53). If the mother was unaffected, then there was no record of affected siblings, which indicates that the risk of recurrence is negligible.

Homoplasmic mtDNA mutations are transmitted to all maternal offspring. However, the genetic advice given to these families is not straightforward. Most patients with LEBER HEREDITARY OPTIC NEUROPATHY (LHON; see also Online links box) have homoplasmic mtDNA mutations. Although all offspring inherit the mutation, only some will develop the disease. Approximately 50% of males, but only 10% of females, develop impaired vision54, which certainly indicates that nuclear genetic factors are important in the expression of the disease. Another homoplasmic mtDNA mutation, the 1555A&gt;G 12S ribosomal RNA (RNR1) mutation55, is an important cause of post-lingual deafness. Its clinical expression depends on the administration of amino-glycoside antibiotics, which highlights the importance of environmental factors in the expression of homoplasmic mtDNA disease. Although it is obvious that genetic counselling has to be tailored to specific mutations, further information is required to determine the risk for individual defects.

The transmission of heteroplasmic mtDNA point mutations is even more complex. Nuclear genetic56 and environmental factors almost certainly affect expression of the disease phenotype. In addition, there is a GENETIC BOTTLENECK during development, and the amount of mutated mtDNA that is transmitted to the offspring is variable57 (FIG. 3). Because many of the clinical features depend on the relative proportions of mutated versus wild-type mtDNA, the outcome for each pregnancy remains difficult to predict58.

Clinical features of human mtDNA disease
Mitochondria are vital components of all nucleated cells. Therefore, it is not surprising that mtDNA diseases affect many tissues and that the clinical features are so variable (BOX 1). Such diversity makes it difficult to define the impact of mtDNA mutations on human health, however, stratifying the clinical features into the following groups defines the extent of the problem: classic mtDNA syndromes, clinical syndromes with a high risk of mtDNA mutations, involvement in common disease phenotypes and mtDNA as a predisposition for common disease and ageing.

Box 1 | Common features of mitochondrial DNA-associated diseases
Adult

• Neurological: migraine | strokes | epilepsy | dementia | myopathy | peripheral neuropathy | DIPLOPIA | ATAXIA | speech disturbances | sensorineural deafness

• Gastrointestinal: constipation | irritable bowel | DYSPHAGIA

• Cardiac: heart failure | heart block | cardiomyopathy

• Respiratory: respiratory failure | nocturnal hypoventilation | recurrent aspiration | pneumonia

• Endocrinal: diabetes | thyroid disease | parathyroid disease | ovarian failure

• Ophthalmological: optic atrophy | cataract | ophthalmoplegia | PTOSIS

Paediatric

• Neurological: epilepsy | myopathy | psychomotor retardation | ataxia | spasticity | DYSTONIA | sensorineural deafness

• Gastrointestinal: vomiting | failure to thrive | dysphagia

• Cardiac: biventricular hypertrophic cardiomyopathy | rhythm abnormalities

• Respiratory: central hypoventilation | apnoea

• Haematological: anaemia | PANCYTOPAENIA

• Renal: renal tubular defects

• Liver: hepatic failure

• Endocrinal: diabetes | adrenal failure

• Ophthalmological: optic atrophy

DIPLOPIA

Double vision; derived from the Greek diplous, meaning double, and ops, meaning eye.

ATAXIA

The loss of the ability to coordinate muscular movement.

DYSPHAGIA

A difficulty in swallowing.

PTOSIS

The abnormal lowering or drooping of the upper eyelid that is caused by muscle weakness.

DYSTONIA

A neurological movement disorder that is characterized by involuntary muscle contractions that might cause twisting or jerking movements of the body.

PANCYTOPAENIA

A deficiency of all blood cells including red cells, white cells and platelets.

OPHTHALMOPLEGIA

Weakness of one or more of the muscles that control eye movement.

PEARSON SYNDROME

A severe disease during infancy that affects bone marrow and pancreas function owing to large-scale rearrangements of the mitochondrial genome.

Clinical features are specific and clinical diagnosis is straightforward for patients with the classic syndromes. However, in many patients, the clinical symptoms might be non-specific and mtDNA disease is only one of several possible diagnoses. Important clues to a possible mitochondrial origin for the symptoms include a maternal family history and the involvement of several tissues (BOX 2). For a large number of patients, diagnosis depends on the results of several lines of investigation. This includes histochemical and biochemical studies to determine the precise nature of the respiratory chain defect, analysis of the mitochondrial genome for common mutations and, finally, complete genome sequencing to look for rare or novel mutations59. The mitochondrial genome is highly variable and the ease of whole-genome sequencing does not resolve some diagnostic dilemmas because the interpretation of a novel sequence change can be difficult in relation to potential pathogenicity60. Accurate diagnosis of an mtDNA defect is essential because of the consequences for both the patient and the family members.

Classic syndromes
Genetic defects of the human mitochondrial genome were first described in 1988 (REFS 61,62) and arose from the investigation of two syndromes — Kearns–Sayre syndrome (KSS) and LHON. In KSS, single, large-scale mtDNA deletions (usually sporadic) were detected in muscle biopsies, and mitochondrial ultrastructural and cytochemical abnormalities in the muscle were apparent. For LHON, a strict maternal pattern of inheritance was evident and point mutations involving the ND family of genes that encode subunits of complex I were identified. Since 1988, several mutations63 of the mitochondrial genome have been identified and associated with disease (TABLE 2).

Clinical syndromes that have a high probability of mitochondrial DNA involvement
Over the past decade, we have become aware of several clinical syndromes that might be associated with mtDNA mutations. The increasing recognition of mtDNA involvement in disease is partially due to the relative ease of sequencing the mitochondrial genome, although defining pathogenicity of specific base substitutions can be difficult60. Examples of such diseases include progressive external OPHTHALMOPLEGIA64, PEARSON SYNDROME65, LEIGH SYNDROME66,67 (see also Online links box), exercise-induced muscle pain, fatigue and RHABDOMYOLYSIS68 (see also Online links box), and amino-glycoside-induced hearing loss55. For some of these conditions, such as progressive external ophthalmoplegia, mtDNA disease is the most likely cause, whereas in others, such as Leigh syndrome, there is a long list of potential genetic causes.

Involvement in common disease phenotypes
The principal difficulty for clinicians is that patients with mtDNA disease rarely have a classic phenotype and mtDNA enters into the differential diagnosis of many common clinical syndromes. A good example of a common condition in which mtDNA is a potential cause is diabetes, the most common metabolic disease to affect humans69. mtDNA disease certainly is associated with diabetes, but these patients represent a tiny proportion of those affected with diabetes70–72. Because several mtDNA mutations cause diabetes63 it is clearly impractical and uneconomical to screen all patients with diabetes for causative mutations. From the list of common clinical features seen in patients with mtDNA disease (BOX 1), it is obvious that it is difficult to decide which patients to investigate for possible mtDNA disease. Further difficulties in this area have been highlighted by a recent report that describes a clear association between members of a large family that harbour a homoplasmic mitochondrial tRNA mutation and a metabolic syndrome that is characterized by hypertension, hypomagnesaemia and hypercholesterolaemia9. Because conditions such as hypertension and hyperc-holesterolaemia affect many individuals73, the number of patients with mtDNA disease is potentially very high. However, it must be kept in the context that most reports describe isolated families. In epidemiological surveys of populations74, the incidence of mtDNA mutations within a specific disease phenotype75 is small. Other factors that make the diagnosis of mtDNA difficult include the specific combination of clinical symptoms (BOX 2); for example, mitochondrial diabetes is often accompanied by deafness70, and stroke-like episodes are usually associated with migraine-like symptoms. There is no doubt that many patients with mtDNA mutations go undiagnosed for years and many are probably never recognized. Increased awareness among physicians and paediatricians is important, as is the investigation of patients in specialist centres that are able to provide a complete range of diagnostic tests.

Box 2 | Guidelines for the recognition of patients with mitochondrial DNA disease
A list of the clinical guidelines that have been generated from our experience of invesbtigating and managing patients with mtDNA mutations.

• Maternal inheritance

• Recognition of classic syndromes; for example, mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes (MELAS) or chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO)

• Recognition of characteristic clinical features; for example, biventricular cardiac hypertrophy

• Involvement of many organ systems; for example, diabetes and deafness

• Specific combinations of symptoms; for example, strokes and migraine and seizures and ataxia

• Abnormal clinical or laboratory investigations; for example, lactic acidaemia in children, characteristic magnetic-resonance-imaging findings, abnormal muscle biopsy that is associated with RAGGED-RED FIBRES or cytochrome c oxidase-deficient fibres

LEIGH SYNDROME

A disease that affects the brainstem and basal ganglia and is characterised by defects in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation.

RHABDOMYOLYSIS

The breakdown of muscle fibres owing to injury, toxins or metabolic disease, which leads to high concentrations of myoglobin in both plasma and urine

RAGGED3RED FIBRES

The pathological hallmark of mtDNA disease that is characterized by the subsarcolemmal accumulation of abnormal mitochondria in the muscle fibre, which stains red with a Gomori trichrome stain.

Mitochondrial DNA variants as a predisposition for common disease
There has been considerable interest in the possibility that mtDNA variants might predispose to common diseases; for example, diabetes, Alzheimer disease (AD) and Parkinson disease (PD)76. The known association of diabetes with mtDNA mutations and the involvement of reactive oxygen species in the aetiology of AD and PD has encouraged a large number of studies. The first approach involves identifying candidate pathogenic mutations by comparing mtDNA sequences between patients and control groups. Unfortunately, interpreting the results is limited by the relatively small number of individual mtDNA sequences in each group and by the high mutation rate of mtDNA, which results in a high frequency of rare variants or private polymorphisms77. Some variants are more common than others. For example, the 16189 variant, a variable length polycytosine tract in the non-coding control region, has been associated with several late-onset, multifactorial disorders, including susceptibility to cardiomyopathy78 and type 2 diabetes79, and has been proposed to affect mtDNA replication79. However, because this variant occurs frequently within the population, concerns arise (that are similar to the ‘haplogroup’ studies) over the control cohorts that are chosen for such population-based surveys. Human populations can be divided into several mtDNA haplogroups that are based on specific SNPs, reflecting mutations accumulated by a discrete maternal lineage80. Therefore, haplogroup association studies have been used to define the role of mtDNA mutations in complex diseases. In this approach, disease and control mtDNA sequence sets are assigned to haplo-groups, and the distribution of haplogroups is compared. A significant difference is interpreted to indicate that the mtDNA ‘background’ has an effect on expression or penetrance of the clinical abnormalities. Various results have been reported for both AD and PD81–84. Given the inconsistency among different studies, it is difficult to conclude unequivocally that the risk of either PD or AD is influenced by mitochondrial haplogroups. Some of the inconsistency could be due to population-substructure differences between disease and control groups. It is difficult to ‘match’ groups, even when one tries to control nationality and ethnicity85.

CYTOPLAST

An enucleated donor cell that contains patient mitochondria and that is used to generate cybrid fusions.

Models of mitochondrial DNA disease
The inability to genetically engineer or transform the mitochondrial genome in vitro or in vivo has severely hampered efforts to study the relationship between mtDNA genotype and clinical phenotype in animal models that bear heteroplasmic, pathogenic mtDNA mutations. Despite this, much has been learned of the biochemical and cellular consequences of specific mtDNA mutations through the generation of transmitochondrial cytoplasmic cybrid cells. In this system, immortalized human cell lines that have been completely depleted of their endogenous mtDNA (ρ° cells) are repopulated with exogenous, patient mitochondria. As ρ° cells have no functional respiratory chain and are dependent on pyruvate and uridine for growth, the loss of either of these two metabolic requirements can be used to select for transformants that harbour complementing (exogenous) mtDNA86. This elegant system allows the functional and physiological consequences of different levels of heteroplasmy of certain mtDNA mutations to be tested87,88. In addition, it has also proved useful in determining the genetic origin of certain mitochondrial disorders89,90, the effect of nuclear background on the segregation of pathogenic mtDNA mutations91 and in identifying the first tRNA suppressor mutation in human mitochondria92. It has also been used to test rational, genetic therapies and more recently, to demonstrate the presence of heterologous mtDNA recombination in human cells44.

The generation of heteroplasmic mice that harbour pathogenic mtDNA mutations was frustratingly difficult. Heteroplasmic mice were first generated by fusing zygotes that carried one mtDNA haplotype with enucleated embryos that carried a different haplotype93,94, although these mice (BALB and NZB) harboured only neutral mtDNA variants. Further advances were made with the generation of chimeric, heteroplasmic chloramphenicol resistant (CAPR) mice, which could transmit mtDNA mutations to subsequent generations and showed signs of mitochondrial dysfunction95,96. By fusing CYTOPLASTS that harbour high levels of a somatic mtDNA rearrangement to one-cell embryos, Hayashi and colleagues generated a model that has a pathogenic deletion or duplication97 of the mitochondrial genome, which was transmitted through the germ line. These mice showed muscle and cardiac defects, but also, more prominently, renal failure together with lactic acidosis, anaemia and a mosaic distribution of COX deficiency. Human mtDNA-rearrangement mutations rarely result in renal disease, so this experiment highlighted the potential for species-specific symptoms and signs. Although subsequent studies that use this mouse model have improved our understanding of mitochondrial segregation and disease pathogenesis98, no reported studies specifically address the development of potential therapies.

The generation of mouse models that target nuclear genes involved in mtDNA maintenance or replication, such as the Tfam knockout mouse, has proved to be a more successful approach99–103. Using the Cre-loxP recombination system, Larsson and colleagues disrupted the Tfam gene in selected mouse tissues, yielding models that provide clues to potentially important factors in the development of specific clinical features associated with mtDNA disease. For example, the mice generated by the postnatal disruption of Tfam in neurons of the hippocampus and neocortex develop a late-onset neurodegeneration, but there is minimal cell loss until the mice developed seizures101. This finding indicates that stress or neuronal discharge resulted in an acute energy crisis, which highlights the importance of management issues such as the effective control of seizures in patients with mtDNA disease.

Management of mtDNA diseases
Although defining the clinical features and establishing the diagnosis of mtDNA disease remain considerable challenges, the development of effective curative treatment is also a challenging hurdle for experimental scientists. However, there are important issues associated with the clinical management of patients and many of these issues have recently been discussed104. Early detection of treatable symptoms is crucial.

SATELLITE CELLS

Quiescent cells that are located between the basal lamina and the plasmalemma of the muscle fibre, and are a main contributor to postnatal muscle growth.

ALLOTOPIC EXPRESSION

The expression of a gene in a different cellular compartment to its target location. In the context described here, it is the recoding of a mitochondrial gene to allow it to be expressed in the nucleus. The subsequent conjugation of a mitochondrial-targeting sequence promotes import and localization of the gene product to the organelle.

AMNIOCENTESIS

An aspiration of cells from the amniotic sac, using a needle, for biochemical and genetic analysis.

CHORIONIC VILLUS BIOPSY

A placental biopsy that is carried out in early pregnancy to collect fetal tissue for genetic and biochemical analysis.

POLAR BODY

A small haploid cell that is produced during oogenesis and that does not develop into a functional ovum.

Mitochondrial DNA mutation levels can be manipulated through exercise
In healthy individuals, lack of exercise (deconditioning) leads to an overall reduction in mitochondrial enzyme activity, whereas endurance training improves enzyme activity. Resistance training or muscle necrosis stimulates the incorporation of SATELLITE CELLS into existing muscle fibres105,106. It is postulated that for sporadic mutations, resistance training might lead to an overall reduction in the proportion of mutated mtDNA versus wild-type, as satellite cells contain a low or negligible amount of mutated mtDNA106,107. Endurance training might therefore improve function by increasing wild-type mtDNA levels. However, there are concerns that mutated mtDNA might be preferentially amplified, and that this increase might become clinically relevant after deconditioning105,108. Studies are currently underway to address both the improvements and the concerns arising from these earlier reports.

New avenues for treatment of mitochondrial diseases
The polyploid nature of the mitochondrial genome, the phenomenon of heteroplasmy, the inability to deliver potentially therapeutic nucleic acids to the organelle through mitochondrial transfection, and the slow realization of appropriate animal models of mtDNA disease are the main problems for the development of gene-based treatments. Despite these, several strategies that seek to rescue mitochondrial function through complementation of the genetic defect or direct manipulation of the levels of mutated mtDNA have been considered.

One way of complementing a dysfunctional mitochondrial protein is through ALLOTOPIC EXPRESSION. Using this approach, it was possible to express the wild-type ATPase 6 protein allotopically from nucleus-transfected constructs in transmitochondrial cybrid cells that were homoplasmic for the 8993T&gt;G MTATP6 (subunit 6 of mitochondrial ATP synthase) mutation (which causes neurogenic weakness, ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) syndrome) and demonstrate a partial rescue of the biochemical defect109. A similar strategy has been used to express a modified NADH dehydrogenase subunit 4 (ND4) gene to complement the 11778G&gt;A mutation that causes LHON110. To complement mitochondrial tRNA defects, an alternative approach has been proposed. Yeast cytosolic tRNALysCUU (tK1) and similar derivatives can be imported into isolated human mitochondria if the tRNA is amino-acylated and supplied with soluble factors, including lysl-tRNA synthetases111. Using transmitochondrial cybrid cells and primary human fibroblasts that carry the 8344A&gt;G TRNK (a tRNA gene) mutation, which causes myoclonic epilepsy and ragged-red fibres (MERRF) syndrome, it has recently been shown that the imported tRNALys is correctly amino-acylated and able to participate in mitochondrial translation, partially rescuing mitochondrial function112.

Because the recessive nature of many pathogenic mutations dictates that a small percentage of the wild-type genotype is protective, a minor adjustment to the balance of mutated to wild-type genomes in favour of the wild type could improve both biochemical function and resolve the clinical problem. The selective inhibition of mutated mtDNA replication by antigenomic agents has been applied to manipulate mtDNA heteroplasmy113. Another strategy involves targeting the organelle with restriction endonucleases that, by differentiating between mtDNA genotypes, can cause the preferential elimination of the mutated genotype and propagation of the wild-type genotype114,115. Pharmacological approaches to shift mtDNA heteroplasmy are also being investigated. Oligomycin, an irreversible inhibitor of mitochondrial ATP synthase, has been used to increase the fraction of wild-type molecules in cells that harbour the 8933T&gt;G MTATP6 mutation under culture conditions (using galactose as the sole carbon source) that specifically select for the wild-type molecule116. This culture medium could also selectively kill cells that are homoplasmic for a common (4,977-bp deletion) mtDNA rearrangement — the molecular abnormality in many patients with KSS. In this case, a ketogenic medium has been used to shift the heteroplasmy of cells that contain a mixture of wild-type and partially deleted mtDNAs117. Finally, the revelation that overexpressing mitochondrial Tu translation elongation factor, TUFM, in yeast mutant counterparts of TRNL1 (a tRNA gene) MELAS (mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes) mutations facilitates the rescue of the respiratory defect might have implications for human disease-related mutations118.

Prevention of transmission of mtDNA disease
Improving genetic advice
The question often asked by both families and clinicians is whether there are any prospects for providing either better guidance for families or even preventing the transmission of mtDNA disease. AMNIOCENTESIS and CHORIONIC VILLUS BIOPSY are widely used to diagnose autosomal and chromosomal abnormalities, and might be of value in heteroplasmic mtDNA disorders. Chorionic villus biopsy has been used in some families that have heteroplasmic mtDNA disorders, where the results have influenced the clinical management119–121. In many heteroplasmic mtDNA64,122 disorders there are marked tissue-specific differences in the level of heteroplasmy, and therefore a reasonable concern is whether a prenatal sample will reflect the likely outcome for the fetus. The present evidence indicates that this should not be a problem94,123. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) allows either analysis of mtDNA from the POLAR BODY of unfertilized oocytes, or from one to two single cells that are taken from 8-cell embryos, followed by the implantation of healthy embryos. The potential value of this technique is obvious, but there is little reported information of its application in patients with mtDNA mutations. The high number of mitochondrial genomes within oocytes124 indicates that PGD should be feasible for mtDNA disease. Experiments in heteroplasmic mice have shown the levels of heteroplasmy to be virtually identical between the ooplasm and polar body of the mature oocyte and also between blastomeres of each of the 2-, 4-, and 6–8-cell embryo125.

GERMINAL VESICLE

A stage during oocyte maturation in which the oocyte nucleus is located close to the surface of the egg cell and is clearly visible.

Alternative strategies associated with oocyte manipulation
Development of new strategies to prevent the transmission of mtDNA is a very important aspect of disease management. An obvious method to prevent the transmission of an mtDNA mutation to the offspring is oocyte donation. However, although the oocyte would be fertilized using the father’s sperm, the child would have the nuclear genotype of the donor female, a less-than-ideal option for many mothers. Cytoplasmic transfer involves the transfer of normal mitochondria into the abnormal oocyte to dilute the effect of any mtDNA defect126. Cytoplasmic transfer between human oocytes has been carried out to improve the outcome of assisted reproduction methods127. The effectiveness of this procedure is uncertain128, but some of the children born were heteroplasmic with low levels of mtDNA from the donor oocyte129. However, despite the observation that changes in heteroplasmy can occur, it is likely that this technique will have limited value for patients with mtDNA disease, as mouse experiments indicate that the amount of mtDNA that can be transferred is relatively small130.

Alternatively, nuclear chromosomes from an oocyte that contains mutated mtDNA could be transferred to an enucleated oocyte from a normal female131. This method has obvious advantages: the offspring will be genetically related to both parents and the chances of achieving very low levels of mutated mtDNA in the oocyte are high. However, important technical and ethical or legal issues make progress in this area difficult, principally because the technique involves the genetic manipulation of fertilized oocytes. To overcome these issues, the transfer could be carried out at different stages of oocyte maturation, although transfer from mature unfertilized oocytes is difficult because of the serious risk of aneuploidy that is due to chromosome loss during transfer or due to missegregation following the disruption of the meiotic spindle. Karyoplast transfer of the GERMINAL VESICLE between oocytes might be possible before in vitro maturation and subsequent fertilization (FIG. 4). However, although maturation and fertilization of normal germinal-vesicle-stage oocytes has been achieved with both mouse132–134 and human oocytes135,136, these methods are very inefficient. Pronuclear-stage transfer is possibly more feasible because human pronuclear oocytes can be manipulated to generate normal offspring137 and because this technique is feasible in the mouse138,139.

Acquired mtDNA mutations in ageing and cancer
Mitochondrial theory of ageing
The mitochondrial theory of ageing proposes that progressive accumulation of somatic mutations in mtDNA during a lifetime leads to an inevitable decline in mitochondrial function140. The most important biochemical factors in this process are considered to be reactive oxygen species (ROS), which are generated at very low levels during the normal function of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. It has been proposed that ROS can cause somatic mutations in mtDNA140. These mutations then result in impaired function of the respiratory chain, leading to increased ROS production and the subsequent accumulation of more mutations. There is evidence that some pathogenic mutations, such as at 8993T&gt;G, lead to increased ROS production141; interestingly, for 8993T&gt;G, free radical-mediated inhibition of OXPHOS can be restored by antioxidants142. The ROS vicious cycle is believed to account for an exponential increase in oxidative damage during ageing, which results in the eventual loss of cellular and tissue functions through a combination of energy insufficiency, signalling defects, apoptosis and replicative senescence.

Studies in human and mouse models
Although the mitochondrial theory of ageing was first suggested in the 1950s, the first convincing evidence of a biochemical defect in humans was the detection of COX-deficient cells in ageing post-mitotic tissues143 (FIG. 2). These cells had identical characteristics to those found in patients with inherited mitochondrial disease37. Surprisingly, these cells show the clonal expansion of an individual mutation, which is often an mtDNA rearrangement, rather than many individual mtDNA mutations144,145. In addition, studies from patients showed that, in the presence of many mtDNA genomes within a cell, the mutation is functionally recessive and a threshold effect is observed37. More recently, mtDNA mutations were found to accumulate to high levels in dividing cells and presumably stem cells39,146, and cause an observable biochemical defect39.

GENETIC DRIFT

Changes in the frequency of a genetic variant in a population owing to chance alone.

How a mutation in an individual genome can clonally expand to high levels in individual cells is a crucial question. So far, several theories have been proposed, including the selective replication of mutated mtDNA, the longevity of mitochondria that contain mutated mtDNA and the ‘sick mitochondrion’ hypothesis (with preferential replication of mitochondria that have impaired OXPHOS activities and higher mutant load)147–149. However, mathematical-modelling studies have also indicated that this process might occur by GENETIC DRIFT150.

Studies from ageing humans and animal models showed good correlation between ageing and the presence of mtDNA mutations. To test the mitochondrial ageing hypothesis, knock-in mice expressing a proofreading-deficient version of PolgA were developed10. These mice acquire mtDNA mutations at a higher rate than is normal because the introduction of a point mutation into the exonuclease region of the PolgA gene drastically reduces its proof-reading exonuclease activity. The phenotype of the PolgA mutator mouse has many hallmarks of premature ageing, including a characteristic hunched appearance that is indicative of osteoporosis, reduced activity, severe weight loss with virtually no remaining adipose tissue and a marked reduction in muscle mass. Although this study provides strong evidence that somatic mtDNA mutations contribute to ageing, further experiments are required to confirm that somatic mtDNA mutations are causal in the ageing process.

Mitochondrial DNA mutations and cancer
In a landmark paper in 1998, Vogelstein and colleagues reported that mtDNA mutations were present in 7 out of 10 colorectal cancer cell lines that were studied151. Although these mtDNA mutations were somatic and absent in other patient tissues, many were homoplasmic in the tumour tissue. Since then, numerous other studies have documented the presence of somatic mtDNA mutations in both solid tumours and leukaemias152–156. How these mutations accumulate to high levels in individual tumours is still unclear, although both modelling and molecular studies indicate that they possibly accumulate without selection38,39. In addition, there is no evidence of whether mtDNA mutations themselves contribute to the development of the tumour. Original work on colorectal tumours showed that many of the mutations detected were not associated with a mitochondrial defect. Moreover, some of the mutations seen in other tumours are recognized polymorphic variants151. Therefore, although a direct link between the presence of the mtDNA mutation and the development of the tumour has not been made, the presence of a mtDNA mutation might prove significant in the detection of tumour recurrence152 and possibly in the detection of genotoxic damage157.

Conclusions and future prospects
It is nearly 25 years since Sanger and colleagues sequenced the human mitochondrial genome, and significant progress in the mitochondrial field continues to be made. Our understanding of the pathogenesis of mtDNA disease will greatly improve by studying the basic processes involved in replication, transcription and translation of the mitochondrial genome.

Unequivocally, mtDNA mutations are an important cause of genetic disease. The clinical variability of these disorders makes the recognition of patients with mtDNA disease a real challenge. Clinicians must be aware of its impact; accurate diagnosis requires a combination of different studies and should be carried out in specialist centres. Although the most disappointing area has been the lack of treatment for patients with mtDNA disease, several new experimental approaches are currently under investigation. It is crucial that further work and ideas are forthcoming to realistically treat or prevent the transmission of mtDNA disease to future generations. The involvement of mtDNA mutations in neurodegenerative disease, ageing and cancer is under debate. Although the development of an animal model should clarify a possible role of mtDNA mutations in ageing, further work in both human tissues and animal models is required to explain the role of mtDNA in these areas of medicine.

The authors work is supported by the Wellcome Trust, Medical Research Centre, Alzheimer’s Research Trust, Muscular Dystrophy Campaign, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Trust and the European Union (FP6, EUmitocombat). We thank R.N. Lightowlers, N. Howell, R. McFarland and M. Herbert for valuable input, and L. Craven and M. Barron for help with the figures.

Competing interests statement

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Figure 1 The role of the mitochondrial genome in energy generation
a This highlights the importance of the mitochondrial genome in contributing polypeptide subunits to the five enzyme complexes that comprise the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system within the inner mitochondrial membrane — the site of ATP synthesis. The reoxidation of reducing equivalents (NADH (reduced flavin adenine dinucleotide)) that are produced by the oxidation (reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) and FADH2 of carbohydrates (the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle) and fatty acids (β-oxidation) is coupled to the generation of an electrochemical gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane, which is harnessed by the ATP synthase to drive the formation of ATP. b A map of the human mitochondrial genome. The genes that encode the subunits of complex I (ND1–ND6 and ND4L) are shown in blue; cytochrome c oxidase (COI–COIII) is shown in red; cytochrome b of complex III is shown in green; and the subunits of the ATP synthase (ATPase 6 and 8) are shown in yellow. The two ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs; 12S and 16S, shown in purple) and 22 tRNAs, indicated by black lines and denoted by their single letter code, which are required for mitochondrial protein synthesis are also shown. The displacement loop (D-loop), or non-coding control region, contains sequences that are vital for the initiation of both mtDNA replication and transcription, including the proposed origin of heavy-strand replication (shown as OH). The origin of light-strand replication is shown as OL.

Figure 2 Cytochrome c oxidase deficiency in mitochondrial DNA-associated disease and ageing
Transverse tissue sections that are reacted for both cytochrome c oxidase (COX) and succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) activities sequentially, with COX-positive cells shown in brown and COX-deficient cells shown in blue. a Skeletal muscle from a patient with a heteroplasmic mitochondrial tRNA point mutation. The section shows a typical ‘mosaic’ pattern of COX activity, with many muscle fibres harbouring levels of mutated mtDNA that are above the crucial threshold to produce a functional enzyme complex. b Cardiac tissue (left ventricle) from a patient with a homoplasmic tRNA mutation that causes hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, which demonstrates an absence of COX in most cells. c A section of cerebellum from a patient with an mtDNA rearrangement that highlights the presence of COX-deficient neurons. d,e Tissues that show COX deficiency that is due to clonal expansion of somatic mtDNA mutations within single cells — a phenomenon that is seen in both post-mitotic cells (d; extraocular muscles) and rapidly dividing cells (e; colonic crypt) in ageing humans.

Figure 3 The mitochondrial genetic bottleneck
During the production of primary oocytes, a selected number of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) molecules are transferred into each oocyte. Oocyte maturation is associated with the rapid replication of this mtDNA population. This restriction-amplification event can lead to a random shift of mtDNA mutational load between generations and is responsible for the variable levels of mutated mtDNA observed in affected offspring from mothers with pathogenic mtDNA mutations. Mitochondria that contain mutated mtDNA are shown in red, those with normal mtDNA are shown in green.

Figure 4 Nuclear transfer techniques
The prevention of mutated maternal mtDNA transmission could be achieved by nuclear transfer techniques. In theory, this could be carried out at the germinal vesicle stage (a), when clearly identifiable structures are visible. The germinal vesicle contains nuclear chromosomes and could be transferred to an oocyte that contains normal mtDNA (green). Alternatively, pronuclear transfer can be carried out at the fertilized oocyte stage (b); this involves removal of the male and female pronuclei from the oocyte that contains mutated mtDNA (red) and their subsequent transfer to an oocyte that has normal mtDNA (green).

Table 1 Comparison between the human nuclear and mitochondrial genomes*


              Characteristic
            	
              Nuclear genome
            	
              Mitochondrial genome
            	
Size	~3.3 x 109 bp	16,569 bp	
Number of DNA molecules per cell	23 in haploid cells; 46 in diploid cells	Several thousand copies per cell (polyploidy)	
Number of genes encoded	~20,000–30,000	37 (13 polypeptides, 22 tRNAs and 2 rRNAs)	
Gene density	~1 per 40,000 bp	1 per 450 bp	
Introns	Frequently found in most genes	Absent	
Percentage of coding DNA	~3%	~93%	
Codon usage	The universal genetic code	AUA codes for methionine; TGA codes for tryptophan; AGA and AGG specify stop codons	
Associated proteins	Nucleosome-associated histone proteins and non-histone proteins	No histones; but associated with several proteins(for example, TFAM) that form nucleoids	
Mode of inheritance	Mendelian inheritance for autosomes and the X chromosome; paternal inheritance for the Y chromosome	Exclusively maternal	
Replication	Strand-coupled mechanism that uses DNA polymerases α and δ	Strand-coupled and strand-displacement models; only uses DNA polymerase γ	
Transcription	Most genes are transcribed individually	All genes on both strands are transcribed as large polycistrons	
Recombination	Each pair of homologues recombines during the prophase of meiosis	There is evidence that recombination occurs at a cellular level but little evidence that it occurs at a population level	
* Table modified from REF. 171 © (1999) John Wiley and Sons. TFAM, mitochondrial transcription factor A; rRNA, ribosomal RNA.

Table 2 Clinical disorders that are caused by mutations in mitochondrial DNA


              Mitochondrial DNA Disorder
            	
              Clinical phenotype
            	
              mtDNA genotype
            	
              Gene
            	
              Status
            	
              Inheritance
            	
              Reference
            	
Kearns–Sayre syndrome	Progressive myopathy, ophthalmoplegia, cardiomyopathy	A single, large-scale deletion	Several deleted genes	Heteroplasmic	Usually sporadic	61,158	
CPEO	Ophthalmoplegia	A single, large-scale deletion	Several deleted genes	Heteroplasmic	Usually sporadic	61, 64	
Pearson syndrome	Pancytopoenia, lactic acidosis	A single, large-scale deletion	Several deleted genes	Heteroplasmic	Usually sporadic	
              65
            	
MELAS	Myopathy, encephalopathy lactic acidosis, stroke-like episodes	3243A&gt;G; 3271T&gt;C	
              TRNL1
            	Heteroplasmic	Maternal	
              159
            	
		Individual mutations	
              ND1 and ND5
            	Heteroplasmic	Maternal	160, 161	
MERRF	Myoclonic epilepsy, myopathy	8344A&gt;G; 8356T&gt;C	
              TRNK
            	Heteroplasmic	Maternal	
              162
            	
NARP	Neuropathy, ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa	8993T&gt;G	
              ATP6
            	Heteroplasmic	Maternal	
              163
            	
MILS	Progressive brain-stem disorder	8993T&gt;C	
              ATP6
            	Heteroplasmic	Maternal	
              67
            	
MIDD	Diabetes, deafness	3243A&gt;G	
              TRNL1
            	Heteroplasmic	Maternal	
              164
            	
LHON	Optic neuropathy	3460G&gt;A	
              ND1
            	Hetero- or homoplasmic	Maternal	
              165
            	
		11778G&gt;A	
              ND4
            	Hetero- or homoplasmic	Maternal	
              62
            	
		14484T&gt;C	
              ND6
            	Hetero- or homoplasmic	Maternal	
              166
            	
Myopathy and diabetes	Myopathy, weakness, diabetes	14709T&gt;C	
              TRNE
            	Hetero- or homoplasmic	Maternal	167,168	
Sensorineural hearing loss	Deafness	1555A&gt;G	
              RNR1
            	Homoplasmic	Maternal	
              55
            	
		Individual mutations	
              TRNS1
            	Hetero- or homoplasmic	Maternal	169,170	
Exercise intolerance	Fatigue, muscle weakness	Individual mutations	
              CYB
            	Heteroplasmic	Sporadic	
              68
            	
Fatal, infantile encephalopathy; Leigh/Leigh-like syndrome	Encephalopathy, lactic acidosis	10158T&gt;C; 10191T&gt;C	
              ND3
            	Heteroplasmic	Sporadic	
              66
            	
ATP6, ATPase 6; CPEO, chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia; CYB, cytochrome b; LHON, Leber hereditary optic neuropathy; MELAS, mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes; MERRF, myoclonic epilepsy and ragged-red fibres; MIDD, maternally-inherited diabetes and deafness; MILS, maternally-inherited Leigh syndrome; ND1,3–6, NADH dehydrogenase subunits 1,3–6; NARP, neurogenic weakness, ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa; RNR1, 12S ribosomal RNA; TRNE,TRNK,TRNL1,TRNS1, mitochondrial tRNAs.


   1. 
            Zeviani M  
            Di Donato S  
           Mitochondrial disorders Brain 127 2153 2172 2004 15358637 
2. 
            Ivanov PL  
             
           Mitochondrial DNA sequence heteroplasmy in the Grand Duke of Russia Georgij Romanov establishes the authenticity of the remains of Tsar Nicholas II Nature Genet 12 417 420 1996 8630496 
3. 
            Anderson S  
             
           Sequence and organization of the human mitochondrial genome Nature 290 457 465 1981 This paper describes the sequence and organization of human mtDNA — the first complete mitochondrial genome to be sequenced. 7219534 
4. 
            Bibb MJ  
            Van Etten RA  
            Wright CT  
            Walberg MW  
            Clayton DA  
           Sequence and gene organization of mouse mitochondrial DNA Cell 26 167 180 1981 7332926 
5. 
            Anderson S  
             
           Complete sequence of bovine mitochondrial DNA. Conserved features of the mammalian mitochondrial genome J Mol Biol 156 683 717 1982 7120390 
6. 
            Andrews RM  
             
           Reanalysis and revision of the Cambridge reference sequence for human mitochondrial DNA Nature Genet 23 147 1999 A re-analysis of the original human placental DNA sample used by Fred Sanger and colleagues, using automated, fluorescent DNA sequencing, which allowed a consensus human mtDNA sequence (the ‘revised Cambridge Reference Sequence’) to be made available. 10508508 
7. 
            Majamaa K  
             
           Epidemiology of A3243G, the mutation for mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes: prevalence of the mutation in an adult population Am J Hum Genet 63 447 454 1998 9683591 
8. 
            Schaefer AM  
            Taylor RW  
            Turnbull DM  
            Chinnery PF  
           The epidemiology of mitochondrial disorders — past, present and future Biochim Biophys Acta 1659 115 120 2004 15576042 
9. 
            Wilson FH  
             
           A cluster of metabolic defects caused by mutation in a mitochondrial tRNA Science 306 1190 1194 2004 15498972 
10. 
            Trifunovic A  
             
           Premature ageing in mice expressing defective mitochondrial DNA polymerase Nature 429 417 423 2004 This report describes a knock-in mouse model that expresses a proof-reading-deficient version of PolgA, the catalytic subunit of mtDNA polymerase, and provides the first in vivo data in mammals to establish a causative link between mtDNA mutations and ageing phenotypes. 15164064 
11. 
            Muller-Hocker J  
           Cytochrome c  oxidase deficient fibres in the limb muscle and diaphragm of man without muscular disease: an age-related alteration J Neurol Sci 100 14 21 1990 1965203 
12. 
            Mootha VK  
             
           PGC-1α-responsive genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation are coordinately downregulated in human diabetes Nature Genet 34 267 273 2003 12808457 
13. 
            Petersen KF  
             
           Mitochondrial dysfunction in the elderly: possible role in insulin resistance Science 300 1140 1142 2003 12750520 
14. 
            DiMauro S  
            Schon EA  
           Mitochondrial respiratory-chain diseases N Engl J Med 348 2656 2668 2003 12826641 
15. 
            Shoubridge EA  
           Nuclear genetic defects of oxidative phosphorylation Hum Mol Genet 10 2277 2284 2001 11673411 
16. 
            Lang BF  
            Gray MW  
            Burger G  
           Mitochondrial genome evolution and the origin of eukaryotes Annu Rev Genet 33 351 397 1999 10690412 
17. 
            Korhonen JA  
            Pham XH  
            Pellegrini M  
            Falkenberg M  
           Reconstitution of a minimal mtDNA replisome in vitro  EMBO J 23 2423 2429 2004 15167897 
18. 
            Carrodeguas JA  
            Theis K  
            Bogenhagen DF  
            Kisker C  
           Crystal structure and deletion analysis show that the accessory subunit of mammalian DNA polymerase-γ, Pol-γB, functions as a homodimer Mol Cell 7 43 54 2001 11172710 
19. 
            Spelbrink JN  
             
           Human mitochondrial DNA deletions associated with mutations in the gene encoding Twinkle, a phage T7 gene 4-like protein localized in mitochondria Nature Genet 28 223 231 2001 11431692 
20. 
            Clayton DA  
           Replication of animal mitochondrial DNA Cell 28 693 705 1982 This paper outlines the strand-displacement model of mammalian mtDNA replication, in which the two strands of mtDNA are each replicated in a continuous fashion from widely separated origins, requiring extensive displacement of parental DNA strands during leading-strand synthesis. 6178513 
21. 
            Holt IJ  
            Lorimer HE  
            Jacobs HT  
           Coupled leading- and lagging-strand synthesis of mammalian mitochondrial DNA Cell 100 515 524 2000 Using two-dimensional agarose gel electrophoresis, the demonstration of duplex replication intermediates led the authors to propose a further mechanism for mammalian mtDNA replication that involves strand-coupled synthesis. 10721989 
22. 
            Yang MY  
             
           Biased incorporation of ribonucleotides on the mitochondrial L-strand accounts for apparent strand-asymmetric DNA replication Cell 111 495 505 2002 12437923 
23. 
            Bowmaker M  
             
           Mammalian mitochondrial DNA replicates bidirectionally from an initiation zone J Biol Chem 278 50961 50969 2003 14506235 
24. 
            Bogenhagen DF  
            Clayton DA  
           The mitochondrial DNA replication bubble has not burst Trends Biochem Sci 28 357 360 2003 12878002 
25. 
            Holt IJ  
            Jacobs HT  
           Response: The mitochondrial DNA replication bubble has not burst Trends Biochem Sci 28 355 356 2003 12878001 
26. 
            Bogenhagen DF  
            Clayton DA  
           Concluding remarks: The mitochondrial DNA replication bubble has not burst Trends Biochem Sci 28 404 405 2003 12932727 
27. 
            Fish J  
            Raule N  
            Attardi G  
           Discovery of a major D-loop replication origin reveals two modes of human mtDNA synthesis Science 306 2098 2101 2004 15604407 
28. 
            Gaspari M  
            Larsson NG  
            Gustafsson CM  
           The transcription machinery in mammalian mitochondria Biochim Biophys Acta 1659 148 152 2004 15576046 
29. 
            Clayton DA  
           Replication and transcription of vertebrate mitochondrial DNA Annu Rev Cell Biol 7 453 478 1991 1809353 
30. 
            Ojala D  
            Montoya J  
            Attardi G  
           tRNA punctuation model of RNA processing in human mitochondria Nature 290 470 474 1981 7219536 
31. 
            Falkenberg M  
             
           Mitochondrial transcription factors B1 and B2 activate transcription of human mtDNA Nature Genet 31 289 294 2002 12068295 
32. 
            Fernandez-Silva P  
            Enriquez JA  
            Montoya J  
           Replication and transcription of mammalian mitochondrial DNA Exp Physiol 88 41 56 2003 12525854 
33. 
            Gaspari M  
            Falkenberg M  
            Larsson NG  
            Gustafsson CM  
           The mitochondrial RNA polymerase contributes critically to promoter specificity in mammalian cells EMBO J 23 4606 4614 2004 15526033 
34. 
            Jacobs HT  
           Disorders of mitochondrial protein synthesis Hum Mol Genet 12 R293 R301 2003 12928485 
35. 
            Miller C  
             
           Defective mitochondrial translation caused by a ribosomal protein (MRPS16 ) mutation Ann Neurol 56 734 738 2004 15505824 
36. 
            Coenen MJ  
             
           Mutant mitochondrial elongation factor G1 and combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency N Engl J Med 351 2080 2086 2004 15537906 
37. 
            Sciacco M  
            Bonilla E  
            Schon EA  
            DiMauro S  
            Moraes CT  
           Distribution of wild-type and common deletion forms of mtDNA in normal and respiration-deficient muscle fibers from patients with mitochondrial myopathy Hum Mol Genet 3 13 19 1994 A study of individual muscle fibres from patients with mitochondrial myopathy caused by large-scale mtDNA rearrangements revealed that, in addition to levels of deleted mtDNA that are above a critical threshold, respiratory-deficient fibres exhibit a marked reduction in the absolute amount of wild-type mtDNA. 8162014 
38. 
            Coller HA  
             
           High frequency of homoplasmic mitochondrial DNA mutations in human tumors can be explained without selection Nature Genet 28 147 150 2001 11381261 
39. 
            Taylor RW  
             
           Mitochondrial DNA mutations in human colonic crypt stem cells J Clin Invest 112 1351 1360 2003 14597761 
40. 
            Giles RE  
            Blanc H  
            Cann HM  
            Wallace DC  
           Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 77 6715 6719 1980 6256757 
41. 
            Gyllensten U  
            Wharton D  
            Josefsson A  
            Wilson AC  
           Paternal inheritance of mitochondrial DNA in mice Nature 352 255 257 1991 1857422 
42. 
            Shitara H  
            Hayashi JI  
            Takahama S  
            Kaneda H  
            Yonekawa H  
           Maternal inheritance of mouse mtDNA in interspecific hybrids: segregation of the leaked paternal mtDNA followed by the prevention of subsequent paternal leakage Genetics 148 851 857 1998 9504930 
43. 
            Awadalla P  
            Eyre-Walker A  
            Smith JM  
           Linkage disequilibrium and recombination in hominid mitochondrial DNA Science 286 2524 2525 1999 10617471 
44. 
            D’Aurelio M  
             
           Heterologous mitochondrial DNA recombination in human cells Hum Mol Genet 13 3171 3179 2004 15496432 
45. 
            Kraytsberg Y  
             
           Recombination of human mitochondrial DNA Science 304 981 2004 15143273 
46. 
            Elson JL  
             
           Analysis of European mtDNAs for recombination Am J Hum Genet 68 145 153 2001 11115380 
47. 
            Schwartz M  
            Vissing J  
           Paternal inheritance of mitochondrial DNA N Engl J Med 347 576 580 2002 12192017 
48. 
            Taylor RW  
             
           Genotypes from patients indicate no paternal mitochondrial DNA contribution Ann Neurol 54 521 524 2003 14520666 
49. 
            Filosto M  
             
           Lack of paternal inheritance of muscle mitochondrial DNA in sporadic mitochondrial myopathies Ann Neurol 54 524 526 2003 14520667 
50. 
            Schwartz M  
            Vissing J  
           No evidence for paternal inheritance of mtDNA in patients with sporadic mtDNA mutations J Neurol Sci 218 99 101 2004 14759640 
51. 
            Danan C  
             
           Evaluation of parental mitochondrial inheritance in neonates born after intracytoplasmic sperm injection Am J Hum Genet 65 463 473 1999 10417289 
52. 
            Marchington DR  
             
           No evidence for paternal mtDNA transmission to offspring or extra-embryonic tissues after ICSI Mol Hum Reprod 8 1046 1049 2002 12397219 
53. 
            Chinnery PF  
             
           Risk of developing a mitochondrial DNA deletion disorder Lancet 364 592 596 2004 15313359 
54. 
            Man PY  
             
           The epidemiology of Leber hereditary optic neuropathy in the North East of England Am J Hum Genet 72 333 339 2003 12518276 
55. 
            Prezant TR  
             
           Mitochondrial ribosomal RNA mutation associated with both antibiotic-induced and non-syndromic deafness Nature Genet 4 289 294 1993 7689389 
56. 
            Battersby BJ  
            Loredo-Osti JC  
            Shoubridge EA  
           Nuclear genetic control of mitochondrial DNA segregation Nature Genet 33 183 186 2003 12539044 
57. 
            Brown DT  
            Samuels DC  
            Michael EM  
            Turnbull DM  
            Chinnery PF  
           Random genetic drift determines the level of mutant mtDNA in human primary oocytes Am J Hum Genet 68 533 536 2000 11133360 
58. 
            Poulton J  
            Turnbull DM  
           74th ENMC international workshop: mitochondrial diseases 19–20 November 1999, Naarden, the Netherlands Neuromuscul Disord 10 460 462 2000 10899455 
59. 
            Taylor RW  
            Schaefer AM  
            Barron MJ  
            McFarland R  
            Turnbull DM  
           The diagnosis of mitochondrial muscle disease Neuromuscul Disord 14 237 245 2004 15019701 
60. 
            McFarland R  
            Elson JL  
            Taylor RW  
            Howell N  
            Turnbull DM  
           Assigning pathogenicity to mitochondrial tRNA mutations: when ‘definitely maybe’ is not good enough Trends Genet 20 591 596 2004 15522452 
61. 
            Holt IJ  
            Harding AE  
            Morgan-Hughes JA  
           Deletions of muscle mitochondrial DNA in patients with mitochondrial myopathies Nature 331 717 719 1988 The first demonstration that heteroplasmic, large-scale rearrangements of the mitochondrial genome could cause human disease. 2830540 
62. 
            Wallace DC  
             
           Mitochondrial DNA mutation associated with Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy Science 242 1427 1430 1988 This paper describes the first example of a single-nucleotide change in the mitochondrial genome (11778G&gt;A) as the cause of a maternally inherited, neurological disorder in multiple families. 3201231 
63. 
            Brandon MC  
             
           MITOMAP: a human mitochondrial genome database — 2004 update Nucleic Acids Res 33 D611 D613 2005 15608272 
64. 
            Moraes CT  
             
           Mitochondrial DNA deletions in progressive external ophthalmoplegia and Kearns–Sayre syndrome N Engl J Med 320 1293 1299 1989 2541333 
65. 
            Rotig A  
            Cormier V  
            Blanche S  
            Bonnefont J-P  
            Ledeist F  
           Pearson’s marrow pancreas syndrome. A multisystem mitochondrial disorder of infancy J Clin Invest 86 1601 1608 1990 2243133 
66. 
            McFarland R  
             
           De novo mutations in the mitochondrial ND3  gene as a cause of infantile mitochondrial encephalopathy and complex I deficiency Ann Neurol 55 58 64 2004 14705112 
67. 
            de Vries DD  
            van Engelen BG  
            Gabreels FJ  
            Ruitenbeek W  
            van Oost BA  
           A second missense mutation in the mitochondrial ATPase 6 gene in Leigh’s syndrome Ann Neurol 34 410 412 1993 8395787 
68. 
            Andreu AL  
             
           Exercise intolerance due to mutations in the cytochrome b  gene of mitochondrial DNA N Engl J Med 341 1037 1044 1999 10502593 
69. 
            Lowell BB  
            Shulman GI  
           Mitochondrial dysfunction and type 2 diabetes Science 307 384 387 2005 15662004 
70. 
            Maassen JA  
             
           Mitochondrial diabetes: molecular mechanisms and clinical presentation Diabetes 53 Suppl 1 103 109 2004 
71. 
            Saker PJ  
             
           UKPDS 21: low prevalence of the mitochondrial transfer RNA gene (tRNALeu(UUR) ) mutation at position 3243bp in UK Caucasian type 2 diabetic patients Diabet Med 14 42 45 1997 9017352 
72. 
            Ohkubo K  
             
           Mitochondrial gene mutations in the tRNALeu(UUR)  region and diabetes: prevalence and clinical phenotypes in Japan Clin Chem 47 1641 1648 2001 11514398 
73. 
            Kearney PM  
             
           Global burden of hypertension: analysis of worldwide data Lancet 365 217 223 2005 15652604 
74. 
            Chinnery PF  
             
           The epidemiology of pathogenic mitochondrial DNA mutations Ann Neurol 48 188 193 2000 10939569 
75. 
            Choo-Kang AT  
             
           Defining the importance of mitochondrial gene defects in maternally inherited diabetes by sequencing the entire mitochondrial genome Diabetes 51 2317 2320 2002 12086967 
76. 
            Wallace D  
           C. Mitochondrial genetics: a paradigm for aging and degenerative diseases? Science 256 628 632 1992 1533953 
77. 
            Herrnstadt C  
             
           Reduced-median-network analysis of complete mitochondrial DNA coding-region sequences for the major African, Asian, and European haplogroups Am J Hum Genet 70 1152 1171 2002 11938495 
78. 
            Khogali SS  
             
           A common mitochondrial DNA variant associated with susceptibility to dilated cardiomyopathy in two different populations Lancet 357 1265 1267 2001 11418155 
79. 
            Poulton J  
             
           Type 2 diabetes is associated with a common mitochondrial variant: evidence from a population-based case-control study Hum Mol Genet 11 1581 1583 2002 12045211 
80. 
            Torroni A  
             
           Classification of European mtDNAs from an analysis of three European populations Genetics 144 1835 1850 1996 8978068 
81. 
            Chagnon P  
             
           Phylogenetic analysis of the mitochondrial genome indicates significant differences between patients with Alzheimer disease and controls in a French-Canadian founder population Am J Med Genet 85 20 30 1999 10377009 
82. 
            van der Walt JM  
             
           Analysis of European mitochondrial haplogroups with Alzheimer disease risk Neurosci Lett 365 28 32 2004 15234467 
83. 
            Ross OA  
             
           mt4216C variant in linkage with the mtDNA TJ cluster may confer a susceptibility to mitochondrial dysfunction resulting in an increased risk of Parkinson’s disease in the Irish Exp Gerontol 38 397 405 2003 12670626 
84. 
            van der Walt JM  
             
           Mitochondrial polymorphisms significantly reduce the risk of Parkinson disease Am J Hum Genet 72 804 811 2003 12618962 
85. 
            Helgason A  
            Yngvadóttir B  
            Hrafnkelsson B  
            Gulcher J  
            Stefánsson K  
           An Icelandic example of the impact of population structure on association studies Nature Genet 37 90 95 2005 15608637 
86. 
            King MP  
            Attardi G  
           Human cells lacking mtDNA: repopulation with exogenous mitochondria by complementation Science 246 500 503 1989 This paper highlights the technology that has made transmitochondrial cybrids — which are generated by fusing human cell lines that lack mtDNA to enucleated cytoplasts from patients’ cells that harbour mtDNA mutations and then growing them under selection — such an elegant cell culture system to study the bioenergetic and cellular consequences of pathogenic mtDNA mutations. 2814477 
87. 
            Chomyn A  
             
           MELAS mutation in mtDNA binding site for transcription termination factor causes defects in protein synthesis and in respiration but no change in levels of upstream and downstream mature transcripts Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89 4221 4225 1992 1584755 
88. 
            Hayashi J  
             
           Introduction of disease-related mitochondrial DNA deletions into HeLa cells lacking mitochondrial DNA results in mitochondrial dysfunction Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88 10614 10618 1991 1720544 
89. 
            Tiranti V  
             
           Maternally inherited hearing loss, ataxia and myoclonus associated with a novel point mutation in mitochondrial tRNASer(UCN)  gene Hum Mol Genet 4 1421 1427 1995 7581383 
90. 
            Taanman JW  
             
           Molecular mechanisms in mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome Hum Mol Genet 6 935 942 1997 9175742 
91. 
            Dunbar DR  
            Moonie PA  
            Jacobs HT  
            Holt IJ  
           Different cellular backgrounds confer a marked advantage to either mutant or wild-type mitochondrial genomes Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92 6562 6566 1995 7604033 
92. 
            El Meziane A  
             
           A tRNA supressor mutation in human mitochondria Nature Genet 18 350 353 1998 9537417 
93. 
            Jenuth J  
            Peterson AC  
            Fu K  
            Shoubridge EA  
           Random genetic drift in the female germ line explains the rapid segregation of mammalian mitochondrial DNA Nature Genet 14 146 151 1996 By generating heteroplasmic mice for two (neutral) mtDNA genotypes, the authors demonstrated that random genetic drift in early oogenesis was the reason for the observed rapid segregation of mtDNA sequence variants that occurs between generations. 8841183 
94. 
            Jenuth JP  
            Peterson AC  
            Shoubridge EA  
           Tissue-specific selection for different mtDNA genotypes in heteroplasmic mice Nature Genet 16 93 95 1997 9140402 
95. 
            Marchington DR  
            Barlow D  
            Poulton J  
           Transmitochondrial mice carrying resistance to chloramphenicol on mitochondrial DNA: developing the first mouse model of mitochondrial DNA disease Nature Med 5 957 960 1999 10426324 
96. 
            Sligh JE  
             
           Maternal germ-line transmission of mutant mtDNAs from embryonic stem cell-derived chimeric mice Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97 14461 14466 2000 11106380 
97. 
            Inoue K  
             
           Generation of mice with mitochondrial dysfunction by introducing mouse mtDNA carrying a deletion into zygotes Nature Genet 26 176 181 2000 By isolating mouse cybrid clones with high levels of a somatic mtDNA rearrangement and fusing these with fertilized mouse eggs, these authors generated the first mouse model of a pathogenic mtDNA mutation (mtDNA deletion or duplication), which was transmitted from mother to offspring. 11017072 
98. 
            Nakada K  
             
           Inter-mitochondrial complementation: mitochondria-specific system preventing mice from expression of disease phenotypes by mutant mtDNA Nature Med 7 934 940 2001 11479626 
99. 
            Larsson NG  
             
           Mitochondrial transcription factor A is necessary for mtDNA maintenance and embryogenesis in mice Nature Genet 18 231 236 1998 The first Tfam knockout mouse model that demonstrates a role for the TFAM nuclear protein in maintaining mtDNA copy number. 9500544 
100. 
            Silva JP  
             
           Impaired insulin secretion and β-cell loss in tissue-specific knockout mice with mitochondrial diabetes Nature Genet 26 336 340 2000 11062475 
101. 
            Sorensen L  
             
           Late-onset corticohippocampal neurodepletion attributable to catastrophic failure of oxidative phosphorylation in MILON mice J Neurosci 21 8082 8090 2001 11588181 
102. 
            Wredenberg A  
             
           Increased mitochondrial mass in mitochondrial myopathy mice Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 15066 15071 2002 12417746 
103. 
            Wang J  
             
           Dilated cardiomyopathy and atrioventricular conduction blocks induced by heart-specific inactivation of mitochondrial DNA gene expression Nature Genet 21 133 137 1999 9916807 
104. 
            Chinnery PF  
            Bindoff LA  
           116th ENMC international workshop: the treatment of mitochondrial disorders, 14th –16th March 2003, Naarden, The Netherlands Neuromuscul Disord 13 757 764 2003 14561500 
105. 
            Taivassalo T  
             
           Gene shifting: a novel therapy for mitochondrial myopathy Hum Mol Genet 8 1047 1052 1999 10332036 
106. 
            Clark KM  
             
           Reversal of a mitochondrial DNA defect in human skeletal muscle Nature Genet 16 222 224 1997 9207784 
107. 
            Fu K  
             
           A novel heteroplasmic tRNAleu(CUN)  mtDNA point mutation in a sporadic patient with mitochondrial encephalomyopathy segregates rapidly in skeletal muscle and suggests an approach to therapy Hum Mol Genet 5 1835 1840 1996 8923013 
108. 
            Taivassalo T  
             
           Aerobic conditioning in patients with mitochondrial myopathies: physiological, biochemical, and genetic effects Ann Neurol 50 133 141 2001 11506394 
109. 
            Manfredi G  
             
           Rescue of a deficiency in ATP synthesis by transfer of MTATP6 , a mitochondrial DNA-encoded gene, to the nucleus Nature Genet 30 394 399 2002 11925565 
110. 
            Guy J  
             
           Rescue of a mitochondrial deficiency causing Leber Hereditary Optic Neuropathy Ann Neurol 52 534 542 2002 12402249 
111. 
            Kolesnikova OA  
             
           Suppression of mutations in mitochondrial DNA by tRNAs imported from the cytoplasm Science 289 1931 1933 2000 10988073 
112. 
            Kolesnikova OA  
             
           Nuclear DNA-encoded tRNAs targeted into mitochondria can rescue a mitochondrial DNA mutation associated with the MERRF syndrome in cultured human cells Hum Mol Genet 13 2519 2534 2004 15317755 
113. 
            Taylor RW  
            Chinnery PF  
            Turnbull DM  
            Lightowlers RN  
           Selective inhibition of mutant human mitochondrial DNA replication in vitro  by peptide nucleic acids Nature Genet 15 212 215 1997 9020853 
114. 
            Tanaka M  
             
           Gene therapy for mitochondrial disease by delivering restriction endonuclease Sma I into mitochondria J Biomed Sci 9 534 541 2002 12372991 
115. 
            Srivastava S  
            Moraes CT  
           Manipulating mitochondrial DNA heteroplasmy by a mitochondrially targeted restriction endonuclease Hum Mol Genet 10 3093 3099 2001 11751691 
116. 
            Manfredi G  
             
           Oligomycin induces a decrease in the cellular content of a pathogenic mutation in the human mitochondrial ATPase 6 gene J Biol Chem 274 9386 9381 1999 10092618 
117. 
            Santra S  
            Gilkerson RW  
            Davidson M  
            Schon EA  
           Ketogenic treatment reduces deleted mitochondrial DNAs in cultured human cells Ann Neurol 56 662 669 2004 15389892 
118. 
            Feuermann M  
             
           The yeast counterparts of human ‘MELAS’ mutations cause mitochondrial dysfunction that can be rescued by overexpression of the mitochondrial translation factor EF-Tu EMBO Rep 4 53 58 2003 12524521 
119. 
            Harding AE  
            Holt IJ  
            Sweeney MG  
            Brockington M  
            Davis MB  
           Prenatal diagnosis of mitochondrial DNA 8993T&gt;G disease Am J Hum Genet 50 629 633 1992 1539598 
120. 
            Leshinsky-Silver E  
             
           Prenatal exclusion of Leigh syndrome due to T8993C mutation in the mitochondrial DNA Prenat Diagn 23 31 33 2003 12533809 
121. 
            Jacobs LJ  
             
           Transmission and prenatal diagnosis of the T9176C mitochondrial DNA mutation Mol Hum Reprod 11 223 228 2005 15709156 
122. 
            Weber K  
             
           A new mtDNA mutation showing accumulation with time and restriction to skeletal muscle Am J Hum Genet 60 373 380 1997 9012410 
123. 
            White SL  
             
           Two cases of prenatal analysis for the pathogenic T to G substitution at nucleotide 8993 in mitochondrial DNA Prenat Diagn 19 1165 1168 1999 10590437 
124. 
            Lin DP  
             
           Comparison of mitochondrial DNA contents in human embryos with good or poor morphology at the 8-cell stage Fertil Steril 81 73 79 2004 14711547 
125. 
            Dean NL  
             
           Prospect of preimplantation genetic diagnosis for heritable mitochondrial DNA diseases Mol Hum Reprod 9 631 638 2003 12970401 
126. 
            Kagawa Y  
            Hayashi JI  
           Gene therapy of mitochondrial diseases using human cytoplasts Gene Ther 4 6 10 1997 9068789 
127. 
            Cohen J  
            Scott R  
            Schimmel T  
            Levron J  
            Willadsen S  
           Birth of infant after transfer of anucleate donor oocyte cytoplasm into recipient eggs Lancet 350 186 187 1997 9250192 
128. 
            Hawes SM  
            Sapienza C  
            Latham KE  
           Ooplasmic donation in humans: the potential for epigenic modifications Hum Reprod 17 850 852 2002 11925371 
129. 
            Brenner CA  
            Barritt JA  
            Willadsen S  
            Cohen J  
           Mitochondrial DNA heteroplasmy after human ooplasmic transplantation Fertil Steril 74 573 578 2000 10973657 
130. 
            Thorburn DR  
            Dahl HHM  
           Mitochondrial disorders: genetics, counseling, prenatal diagnosis and reproductive options Am J Med Genet 106 102 114 2001 11579429 
131. 
            Roberts RM  
           Prevention of human mitochondrial (mtDNA) disease by nucleus transplantation into an enucleated donor oocyte Am J Med Genet 87 265 266 1999 This paper describes the possibility of preventing transmission of mitochondrial DNA disease. 10564883 
132. 
            Liu H  
            Wang CW  
            Grifo JA  
            Krey LC  
            Zhang J  
           Reconstruction of mouse oocytes by germinal vesicle transfer: maturity of host oocyte cytoplasm determines meiosis Hum Reprod 14 2357 2361 1999 10469710 
133. 
            Liu H  
            Zhang J  
            Krey LC  
            Grifo JA  
           In-vitro  development of mouse zygotes following reconstruction by sequential transfer of germinal vesicles and haploid pronuclei Hum Reprod 15 1997 2002 2000 10967003 
134. 
            Takeuchi T  
            Ergun B  
            Huang TH  
            Rosenwaks Z  
            Palermo GD  
           A reliable technique of nuclear transplantation for immature mammalian oocytes Hum Reprod 14 1312 1317 1999 10325284 
135. 
            Barnes FL  
             
           Blastocyst development and birth after in-vitro  maturation of human primary oocytes, intracytoplasmic sperm injection and assisted hatching Hum Reprod 10 3243 3247 1995 8822452 
136. 
            Goud PT  
             
           In-vitro maturation of human germinal vesicle stage oocytes: role of cumulus cells and epidermal growth factor in the culture medium Hum Reprod 13 1638 1644 1998 9688405 
137. 
            Kattera S  
            Chen C  
           Normal birth after microsurgical enucleation of tripronuclear human zygotes: case report Hum Reprod 18 1319 1322 2003 12773466 
138. 
            Meirelles F  
            Smith LC  
           Mitochondrial genotype segregation in a mouse heteroplasmic lineage produced by embyonic karyoplast transplantation Genetics 145 445 451 1997 9071597 
139. 
            Meirelles F  
            Smith LC  
           Mitochondrial genotype segregation during preimplantation development in mouse heteroplasmic embryos Genetics 148 877 883 1998 9504933 
140. 
            Harman D  
           Free radical theory of aging Mutat Res 275 257 266 1992 This is a description of the theory of ageing in which mitochondria have a key role. 1383768 
141. 
            Geromel V  
             
           Superoxide-induced massive apoptosis in cultured skin fibroblasts harboring the neurogenic ataxia retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) mutation in the ATPase-6 gene of the mitochondrial DNA Hum Mol Genet 10 1221 1228 2001 11371515 
142. 
            Mattiazzi M  
             
           The mtDNA T8993G (NARP) mutation results in an impairment of oxidative phosphorylation that can be improved by antioxidants Hum Mol Genet 13 869 879 2004 14998933 
143. 
            Muller-Hocker J  
           Cytochrome-c-oxidase deficient cardiomyocytes in the human heart —an age-related phenomenon. A histochemical ultracytochemical study Am J Pathol 134 1167 1173 1989 2541614 
144. 
            Muller-Hocker J  
            Seibel P  
            Schneiderbanger K  
            Kadenbach B  
           Different in situ  hybridization patterns of mitochondrial DNA in cytochrome c  oxidase-deficient extraocular muscle fibres in the elderly Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol 422 7 15 1993 7679851 
145. 
            Brierley EJ  
            Johnson MA  
            Lightowlers RN  
            James OF  
            Turnbull DM  
           Role of mitochondrial DNA mutations in human aging: implications for the central nervous system and muscle Ann Neurol 43 217 223 1998 9485063 
146. 
            Nekhaeva E  
             
           Clonally expanded mtDNA point mutations are abundant in individual cells of human tissues Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 5521 5526 2002 11943860 
147. 
            Wallace DC  
           Diseases of the mitochondrial DNA Annu Rev Biochem 61 1175 1212 1992 1497308 
148. 
            de Grey AD  
           A proposed refinement of the mitochondrial free radical theory of aging Bioessays 19 161 166 1997 9046246 
149. 
            Yoneda M  
            Chomyn A  
            Martinuzzi A  
            Hurko O  
            Attardi G  
           Marked replicative advantage of human mtDNA carrying a point mutation that causes the MELAS encephalomyopathy Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89 11164 11168 1992 1454794 
150. 
            Elson JL  
            Samuels DC  
            Turnbull DM  
            Chinnery PF  
           Random intracellular drift explains the clonal expansion of mitochondrial DNA mutations with age Am J Hum Genet 68 802 806 2001 11179029 
151. 
            Polyak K  
             
           Somatic mutations of the mitochondrial genome in human colorectal tumours Nature Genet 20 291 293 1998 The first paper to describe the presence of somatic mtDNA mutations in solid human tumours, in this case colon cancer. In many cases, the mtDNA mutations had accumulated to homoplasmic levels and were not evident in the matched normal tissue from the same patient. A causal relationship between mtDNA mutations and tumorigenesis is yet to be established 9806551 
152. 
            Fliss MS  
             
           Facile detection of mitochondrial DNA mutations in tumors and bodily fluids Science 287 2017 2019 2000 10720328 
153. 
            Jeronimo C  
             
           Mitochondrial mutations in early stage prostate cancer and bodily fluids Oncogene 20 5195 5198 2001 11526508 
154. 
            Jones JB  
             
           Detection of mitochondrial DNA mutations in pancreatic cancer offers a ‘mass’-ive advantage over detection of nuclear DNA mutations Cancer Res 61 1299 1304 2001 11245424 
155. 
            Kirches E  
             
           High frequency of mitochondrial DNA mutations in glioblastoma multiforme identified by direct sequence comparison to blood samples Int J Cancer 93 534 538 2001 11477557 
156. 
            He L  
             
           Somatic mitochondrial DNA mutations in adult-onset leukaemia Leukemia 17 2487 2491 2003 14523470 
157. 
            Wardell TM  
             
           Changes in the human mitochondrial genome after treatment of malignant disease Mutat Res 525 19 27 2003 12650902 
158. 
            Zeviani M  
             
           Deletions of mitochondrial DNA in Kearns–Sayre syndrome Neurology 38 1339 1346 1988 3412580 
159. 
            Goto Y  
            Nonaka I  
            Horai S  
           A mutation in the tRNALeu(UUR)  gene associated with the MELAS subgroup of mitochondrial encephalomyopathies Nature 348 651 653 1990 2102678 
160. 
            Santorelli FM  
             
           Identification of a novel mutation in the mtDNA ND5  gene associated with MELAS Biochem Biophys Res Commun 238 326 328 1997 9299505 
161. 
            Kirby DM  
             
           Mutations of the mitochondrial ND1  gene as a cause of MELAS J Med Genet 41 784 789 2004 15466014 
162. 
            Shoffner JM  
             
           Myoclonic epilepsy and ragged-red fiber disease (MERRF) is associated with a mitochondrial DNA tRNALys  mutation Cell 61 931 937 1990 2112427 
163. 
            Holt IJ  
            Harding AE  
            Petty RK  
            Morgan-Hughes JA  
           A new mitochondrial disease associated with mitochondrial DNA heteroplasmy Am J Hum Genet 46 428 433 1990 2137962 
164. 
            van den Ouweland JWM  
            Lemkes HHPJ  
            Ruitenbeek K  
           Mutation in mitochondrial tRNALeu(UUR)  gene in a large pedigree with maternally transmitted type II diabetes mellitus and deafness Nature Genet 1 368 371 1992 1284550 
165. 
            Howell N  
             
           Leber hereditary optic neuropathy: identification of the same mitochondrial ND1  mutation in six pedigrees Am J Hum Genet 49 939 950 1991 1928099 
166. 
            Johns DR  
            Neufeld MJ  
            Park RD  
           An ND-6  mitochondrial DNA mutation associated with Leber hereditary optic neuropathy Biochem Biophys Res Commun 187 1551 1557 1992 1417830 
167. 
            Hao H  
            Bonilla E  
            Manfredi G  
            DiMauro S  
            Moraes CT  
           Segregation patterns of a novel mutation in the mitochondrial tRNA glutamic acid gene associated with myopathy and diabetes mellitus Am J Hum Genet 56 1017 1025 1995 7726154 
168. 
            McFarland R  
             
           Familial myopathy: New insights into the T14709C mitochondrial tRNA mutation Ann Neurol 55 478 484 2004 15048886 
169. 
            Reid FM  
            Vernham GA  
            Jacobs HT  
           A novel mitochondrial point mutation in a maternal pedigree with sensorineural deafness Hum Mutat 3 243 247 1994 8019558 
170. 
            Sue CM  
             
           Maternally inherited hearing loss in a large kindred with a novel T7511C mutation in the mitochondrial DNA tRNASer(UCN)  gene Neurology 52 1905 1908 1999 10371545 
171. 
            Strachan T  
            Read AP  
           Human Molecular Genetics 2nd edn John Wiley and Sons New York 1999 

