LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   8111117
20584
Clin Psychol Rev
Clin Psychol Rev
Clinical psychology review
0272-7358 1873-7811 

16504359
1892795
10.1016/j.cpr.2006.01.001
UKMS291
Article
Behavioral models of impulsivity in relation to ADHD: Translation between clinical and preclinical studies
Winstanley Catharine A. * Eagle Dawn M.  Robbins Trevor W.  Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge, CB2 3EB, UK
* Corresponding author. University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390-9070, USA. Tel.: +1 214 648 5936; fax: +1 214 648 4182. E-mail address: cath.winstanley@UTsouthwestern.edu (C.A. Winstanley).
29 3 2007 
28 2 2006 
8 2006 
19 6 2007 
26 4 379 395
This file is available to download for the purposes of text mining, consistent with the principles of UK copyright law.Impulsivity, broadly defined as action without foresight, is a component of numerous psychiatric illnesses including attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), mania and substance abuse. In order to investigate the mechanisms underpinning impulsive behavior, the nature of impulsivity itself needs to be defined in operational terms that can be used as the basis for empirical investigation. Due to the range of behaviors that the term impulsivity describes, it has been suggested that impulsivity is not a unitary construct, but encompasses a variety of related phenomena that may differ in their biological basis. Through fractionating impulsivity into these component parts, it has proved possible to devise different behavioral paradigms to measure various aspects of impulsivity in both humans and laboratory animals. This review describes and evaluates some of the current behavioral models of impulsivity developed for use with rodents based on human neuropsychological tests, focusing on the five-choice serial reaction time task, the stop-signal reaction time task and delay-discounting paradigms. Furthermore, the contributions made by preclinical studies using such methodology to improve our understanding of the neural and neurochemical basis of impulsivity and ADHD are discussed, with particular reference to the involvement of both the serotonergic and dopaminergic systems, and frontostriatal circuitry.

ADHDImpulsivityFrontal cortexInhibitionSerotoninDopamineWellcome Trust : 076274 || WT
   1. Introduction
Impulsivity is a characteristic of human behavior that can be both beneficial and detrimental to our everyday lives. For example, the ability to act on impulse may allow us to seize a valuable opportunity, or to make a disastrous decision that we then live to regret. Impulsivity can be viewed as a dimension of normal personality (Eysenck &amp; Eysenck, 1977), but high levels of impulsivity are associated with psychiatric disorders such as ADHD, mania, substance abuse and personality disorders, indicating that this personality trait can be maladaptive (DSM IV, 1994). It has been suggested that impulsivity is not a unitary construct (Evenden, 1999; Moeller, Barratt, Dougherty, Schmitz, &amp; Swann, 2001), and that increases in different aspects of impulsivity may represent different subtypes of ADHD (Nigg, 2003; Sonuga-Barke, 2002).

The aim of this review is to discuss current thought regarding the nature of impulse control, and to evaluate the advancements that have been made in improving our understanding of the neural and neurochemical basis of impulsive behavior. Integral to furthering progress in this field has been the development of behavioral paradigms designed to measure impulsivity in laboratory animals, based on human neuropsychological tests. Data from clinical and preclinical studies are compared and areas of agreement and diversity underlined, with particular reference to multi-process models of both ADHD and impulse control. Future research directions are also suggested which may help resolve some of the issues and inconsistencies present in the literature.

2. The multi-faceted nature of impulsivity
Although impulsivity can be broadly defined as action without foresight, researchers and psychiatrists alike have struggled to formulate a single definition of impulsivity that captures every aspect of behavior encompassed by this concept. A commonly used technique in clinical psychology to measure and identify different aspects of behavior is through the use of self-report questionnaires. A number of such questionnaires have been designed in order to try to quantify and qualify impulsivity in both normal adult and patient populations, such as the Barratt Impulsiveness scale (Barratt, 1994) and the I7 (Eysenck, 1993), but measures of impulsivity are also included in other more general assessments of personality such as the Karolinska Scales of Personality, and the Tridimensional Personality Questionnaire (Cloninger, 1987).

Factor analysis of self-report questionnaires suggests that impulsive behavior consists of several independent dimensions, although there is considerable variation as to the precise definition of these constituent parts (see Evenden, 1999 for review). However, common themes include decreased inhibitory control, intolerance of delay to rewards and quick decision-making due to lack of consideration, as well as more universal deficits such as poor attentional ability. Therefore, one definition of impulsivity which seems particularly appropriate is that “impulsivity encompasses a range of actions which are poorly conceived, prematurely expressed, unduly risky or inappropriate to the situation and that often result in undesirable consequences” (Daruna &amp; Barnes, 1993).

3. Measuring impulsivity in the laboratory
Given the diversity of behavior that the term impulsivity appears to cover, it has been suggested that impulsivity is not a unitary construct at all, but is used to classify a variety of phenomena that may have independent underlying biological mechanisms (Evenden, 1999). Through focusing on different aspects of impulsive behavior, it has proved possible to devise a variety of behavioral paradigms to measure impulsivity in both human and non-human subjects. These can be broadly divided into two categories: those measuring impulsive choice or impulsive decision-making, and those measuring impulsive action or motoric impulsivity.

4. Measuring impulsive action
Impulsive action can be broadly defined as the inability to withhold from making a response. Within the framework of behavioral neuroscience and cognitive psychology, impulse control has been described as an active inhibitory mechanism which modulates the internally or externally driven pre-potent desire for primary reinforcers such as food, sex or other highly desirable rewards. This inhibitory control mechanism may provide the substrate by which rapid conditioned responses and reflexes are transiently suppressed, so that slower cognitive mechanisms can guide behavior. There is an extensive and complex literature on the neural and neurochemical basis of different types of behavioral inhibition (e.g. see Nigg, 2000 for review), the in-depth discussion of which would fall outside the remit of this review, and only the work most relevant to the concept of impulsivity will be considered here.

5. Go/no-go and stop-signal reaction time tasks
Two of the most common tests used to study inhibitory processes in both clinical and non-clinical populations are the go/no-go and stop-signal reaction time (SSRT) tasks (see Band &amp; Van Boxtel, 1999 for recent review). In a typical go/no-go paradigm, following the initiation of a trial, the subject learns to make a particular response when cued to do so by the “go” signal (e.g. to touch the stimulus on a screen or to press a key). However, on a subset of trials, the “no-go” signal is presented, either concurrently with the “go” signal or prior to it, whereupon the subject must withhold from making the pre-potent response. The design of the stop-task is very similar, with the exception that the “no-go” or “stop” signal occurs after the presentation of the “go” signal. The closer the stop signal is in time to the moment of responding, the harder it is for the subject to inhibit their behavior.

Go/no-go (Harrison, Everitt, &amp; Robbins, 1999), stop-change (Feola, de Wit, &amp; Richards, 2000) and, more recently, SSRT paradigms (Eagle &amp; Robbins, 2003a,b) have been developed for use with rats with some success. In the stop-task, rats are trained to respond rapidly and accurately on first one and then the other of two levers. Correct execution of this response sequence results in the delivery of reward. The average time taken to perform this response is calculated and referred to as the mean go reaction time (mRT). On 20% of the trials in a session, a stop-signal is presented in the form of a tone after the rat has responded on the first lever but prior to responding on the second lever. Subjects must then inhibit their response on the second lever in order to receive a reward. Failure to refrain from making this pre-potent response is punished not only by the absence of reward but also by a 5-s timeout, during which the subject cannot engage in the task to earn reward.

In order to assess the ability of a subject to inhibit behavior, the stop-signal reaction time (SSRT) is calculated, which is essentially an estimation of the time taken to inhibit the go response. The SSRT cannot be measured directly, as it is impossible to measure the latency to a response that does not occur. Therefore it is derived using the “horse-race” model developed by Logan and Cowan (1984) which uses the mRT to estimate the SSRT (see Logan, 1994 for further details concerning the “horse-race” model and its application to the stop-task). SSRTs estimated by this method are close to 200 ms for human adult subjects (Logan &amp; Cowan, 1984), but may exceed 400 ms in young children (Schachar &amp; Logan, 1990) and the elderly (Kramer, Humphrey, Larish, Logan, &amp; Strayer, 1994), as well as in adults classified as ‘impulsive’ (Logan, Schachar, &amp; Tannock, 1997) and hyperactive children (Rubia, Oosterlaan, Sergeant, Brandeis, &amp; v Leeuwen, 1998; Schachar &amp; Logan, 1990). For rats, SSRTs have been estimated to be around 300 ms using a conventional SSRT paradigm (Eagle &amp; Robbins, 2003a,b), and between 100 and 150 ms using a ‘stop-change’ version of the task (Feola et al., 2000).

6. The five-choice serial reaction time task
Many behavioral tasks invoke inhibitory processes at some stage and can be useful for measuring aspects of impulsivity. An example of a task used in rats which was not designed with the sole purpose of measuring impulsive behavior but which does require an aspect of behavioral inhibition, is the five-choice serial reaction time task (5CSRT; Carli, Robbins, Evenden, &amp; Everitt, 1983). This task was developed as a test of sustained and divided attention for rats based on the continuous performance task (CPT) used to monitor attentional function in humans (Rosvold, Mirsky, Sarason, Bransome, &amp; Beck, 1956; Wilkinson, 1963).

During the 5CSRT, the animal is required to make a response in one of five response apertures only when a stimulus light located therein is illuminated. Subsequent to beginning a trial and prior to illumination of a stimulus light, there is a 5-s inter-trial interval (ITI) during which the animal must withhold from responding in the apertures. Any responses made during this time are described as premature responses and are punished. These premature responses provide another way of measuring motoric impulsivity and are potentially analogous to “false alarm” errors made in the CPT. One of the advantages of using a task such as the 5CSRT which measures multiple aspects of performance (attention, impulsivity, motivation, speed of responding etc.) is that it is possible to dissociate the effects of various manipulations of the central nervous system (CNS) on different types of behavior.

7. Measuring impulsive choice
Impulsivity is also evident in the making of impulsive decisions or choices as well as in impulsive actions. It has been argued that all impulsivity involves an impulsive action of some sort, in that it is necessary to perform an action in order to select a response alternative. However the key difference conceptually is that, unlike for measurements of impulsive action, there is no “pre-potent” response that is primed and then forcibly inhibited. Furthermore, impulsive choice reflects, to a greater degree, decision-making processes rather than motoric inhibition.

8. Delay-discounting paradigms
One of the most successfully utilised measurements of impulsive choice is intolerance to delay-of-gratification, or delay-discounting, which is the function by which a reward is subjectively devalued by a delay to its delivery. All measurements of delay-discounting, whether operant behavioral tasks or questionnaire-based measures, essentially pose the question of whether a smaller but more immediate reward is worth more or less than a larger but delayed reward see (Ainslie, 1975; Logue, 1988). Under these circumstances, impulsive choice is defined as the selection of the smaller immediate reward. The vast majority of behavioral data strongly indicate that the function relating the subjective value of reward to the magnitude and delay to the delivery of that reward is hyperbolic (see Ainslie, 1975 for review). Such functions predict impulsive choice in that there is a point in time at which the smaller reward is preferred more than the larger but more delayed reward, and this tendency to choose the impulsive option decreases as the delay to the large reward shortens (see Fig. 1).

Devising a sensitive operant delay-discounting task for clinical research has proved difficult due to the essentially limited temporal duration of laboratory measures of behavior, in that human subjects tend not to find it sufficiently aversive to delay gratification over such short periods of time. Nevertheless, there has been one very recent report utilising such an operant delay-discounting procedure (Pietras, Cherek, Lane, Tcheremissine, &amp; Steinberg, 2003) based on the adjusting amount task designed for use with rats (see below for details). The majority of data regarding delay-discounting in the clinical psychology literature, however, has been obtained using questionnaires. On the contrary, a number of different delay-discounting tasks have been developed for use with laboratory animals. In all delay-discounting paradigms, the subject essentially chooses between responding on one lever which leads to a small reward and another which leads to a large but delayed reward. Such tasks can be divided into “systematic” tasks, where the experimenter varies the delay to different sized reinforcers and then measures the number of choices made of the large reward at different delays (e.g. Evenden &amp; Ryan, 1996; Mobini, Chiang, Ho, Bradshaw, &amp; Szabadi, 2000; Wogar, Bradshaw, &amp; Szabadi, 1993), or “adjusting” tasks in which the behavior of the subject determines the delays sampled (Mazur, 1987; Richards, Mitchell, de Wit, &amp; Seiden, 1997), all of which have made valuable contributions to the literature.

9. Impulsivity and ADHD
ADHD is essentially categorised by inattentive, hyperactive and impulsive behavior. Both the attentional and impulse control deficits seen in ADHD patients can be illustrated by their performance of the CPT. ADHD subjects have slower and more variable reaction times, and make more errors of omission indicative of poor attentional ability (e.g. (Epstein et al., 2003). In addition, those with ADHD make more errors of commission, demonstrating reduced behavioral inhibition. Indeed, ADHD patients show elevated levels of impulsivity as measured by a variety of tasks (see e.g. Solanto, 1998, ​2002 for reviews). Focusing on the SSRT task, children with ADHD are slower to inhibit their responses than normal children, as indicated by increases in their SSRT (Nigg, 1999; Purvis &amp; Tannock, 2000; Schachar &amp; Logan, 1990; Schachar, Tannock, Marriott, &amp; Logan, 1995), and similarly fail to cancel their “go” response on the “no-go” trials in go/no-go tasks.

It is this inability to inhibit a pre-potent response that is thought to be one of the fundamental deficits which characterises ADHD. However, some studies indicate that children with ADHD are impaired in their performance of other aspects of the stop-task. For example, there is often a slowing of reaction time on the go trials, as indicated by increases in the mRT, as well as on the stop-trials, which may be indicative of a general processing-speed impairment rather than a specific inhibitory deficit (Oosterlaan, Logan, &amp; Sergeant, 1998; Overtoom et al., 2002; Tannock, 1998). Furthermore, it has also been reported that ADHD children make more errors of commission on a choice reaction time version of the task (i.e. choose the wrong response on the go trials), and omit more trials (i.e. do not respond at all: Bedard et al., 2003; Kuntsi, Oosterlaan, &amp; Stevenson, 2001; Overtoom et al., 2003; Tannock, Schachar, Carr, Chajczyk, &amp; Logan, 1989). Such increases in omissions may have serious consequences for the analysis of the data, as the “horse-race” model used to calculate the SSRT cannot account for such changes in response strategy (Eagle &amp; Robbins, 2003a,b; Solanto et al., 2001; Tannock et al., 1989).

The interpretation of the stop-task performance of ADHD children is therefore far from straightforward, and it has been suggested that differences between the outcomes of various studies using diverse populations of ADHD patients could reflect different subtypes of the disorder. Furthermore, increased SSRT is not a unique behavioral symptom confined to those patients with ADHD, but has been observed in other patient groups including those with damage to the frontal lobes and basal ganglia (Aron, Fletcher, Bullmore, Sahakian, &amp; Robbins, 2003; Rieger, Gauggel, &amp; Burmeister, 2003). Further investigation into such patterns of deficits may provide valuable insight into the processes critically involved in inhibitory control, hence enhancing our understanding of the deficiencies in impulsive control observed in ADHD.

ADHD patients also choose more impulsively in delay-discounting tasks, preferring the smaller but more immediate rewards to the larger more delayed rewards (Schweitzer &amp; Sulzer-Azaroff, 1995; Solanto et al., 2001; Sonuga-Barke, Taylor, Sembi, &amp; Smith, 1992; Sonuga-Barke, Williams, Hall, &amp; Saxton, 1996). However, if the selection of a smaller immediate reward does not reduce the total length of the time the subject spends engaged in the experimental task, it has been reported that ADHD patients are able to wait for rewards. It has been suggested that this pattern of impulsive choice is indicative of enhanced motivation to escape or avoid delay, and that the inattentive, overactive and impulsive behaviors in which ADHD patients engage are functional expressions of delay-aversion (Sonuga-Barke, 2002, 2003). However, it would appear there is a double dissociation between preference for delayed rewards and behavioral disinhibition, in that ADHD patients can choose to wait for large rewards under certain circumstances, even when such a choice involves ongoing inhibitory control (Sonuga-Barke et al., 1992, 1996). Furthermore, the level of inhibitory control ADHD patients show, as typified by the SSRT, and their preference for large delayed rewards, as assessed using delay-discounting paradigms, are not correlated (Solanto et al., 2001). Nevertheless, these two performance measures together have proved to be highly diagnostic, identifying over 90% of patients, confirming that poor inhibitory control and elevated impulsive choice are core symptoms of ADHD.

Such data have lead to the hypothesis that there may be two subtypes of ADHD which lead to the generation of ADHD symptoms via two distinct pathways: the altered “motivational style” pathway (MSP ADHD) which generates a strong aversion to experiencing delays, and the disordered “thought and action” pathway (DTAP ADHD) which results in a more fundamental dysregulation of inhibitory function. According to this dual-process model, those with DTAP ADHD may have a more generalised cognitive impairment, and exhibit qualitatively different behavior from normal children, whereas those with MSP ADHD only have difficulty in situations requiring the regulation of their behavior in time, and their symptomatology may reflect an extreme form of a normal personality trait. Moreover, it is suggested that these two forms of ADHD are underpinned by differing neurobiological mechanisms. DTAP ADHD may be primarily associated with dysregulation of prefrontal areas and their associated circuitry, particularly the connections with the basal ganglia and striatum. Such regions are regulated by the mesocortical dopaminergic system. In contrast, MSP ADHD may arise through alterations in the function of areas more fundamentally involved in reward processing, such as the ventral striatum, and innervated by the mesolimbic branch of the dopamine system (Sonuga-Barke, 2002).

This theoretical model has important implications not only for research into ADHD, but also for the understanding of impulsive behavior, and clearly supports the suggestion that different types of impulsivity are mediated by diverse neurobiological processes. It has recently been demonstrated in both humans and rats that different measures of impulsivity are not correlated within individuals (McDonald, Schleifer, Richards, &amp; de Wit, 2003; Winstanley, Theobald, Dalley, &amp; Robbins, 2004), suggesting that members of this collection of behaviors are independently regulated. The following section reviews some of the studies that have investigated which structures and neurotransmitter systems are involved in these different aspects of impulsivity, and speculates as to whether such data is compatible with a dual-process, or even multi-process, hypothesis of ADHD.

10. The neural basis of impulsive behavior
Frontostriatal systems have been heavily implicated in response inhibition, and dysfunction within this circuitry is thought to produce impulsivity associated with a number of psychological disorders (Jentsch &amp; Taylor, 1999; Robbins, 2000). The roles of different areas of the frontal cortex and ventral striatum in various types of impulse control are considered below, and the preclinical data summarised in Table 1.

11. The frontal cortex
The cause of ADHD is currently unknown but a widely accepted hypothesis is that ADHD stems from dysfunction within the prefrontal cortex (PFC) (Castellanos &amp; Tannock, 2002). Abnormalities in more ventral regions of the frontal lobes, such as the orbitofrontal cortex, have also been observed in ADHD (Hesslinger et al., 2002; Itami &amp; Uno, 2002). The involvement of dysfunction within the frontal cortex in ADHD is supported by data demonstrating similarities between patients with injuries to or diseases of the frontal cortex and clinical aspects of ADHD (Shue &amp; Douglas, 1992), particularly in terms of attentional dysfunction (Wilkins, Shallice, &amp; McCarthy, 1987) and distractibility (Chao and Knight, 1995; Woods and Knight, 1986). Attentional impairments have also been observed in rats and monkeys with prefrontal cortex damage e.g.(Arnsten, 1997, 1998; Chao &amp; Knight, 1995; Muir, Everitt, &amp; Robbins, 1996; Passetti, Chudasama, &amp; Robbins, 2002; Woods &amp; Knight, 1986). However, there is also evidence to suggest that ADHD is not solely a prefrontal disorder, but that subcortical structures within the basal ganglia may play an important role (Rieger et al., 2003; Sergeant, 2000). Data from functional imaging studies comparing ADHD children to healthy controls found atypical fronto-striatal activation during performance of a go/no-go task, suggesting that abnormalities within this loop may account for some of the deficits in impulse control observed (Vaidya et al., 1998).

Considering such data from ADHD patients, it is perhaps unsurprising that dysfunction within the frontal cortex appears to be involved in generating impulsive behavior. A substantial body of evidence now exists to demonstrate deficits in a variety of inhibitory processes following damage to the frontal cortex. Recent neuropsychological studies implicate the prefrontal cortex both in terms of preparing to act (Brass &amp; Von Cramon, 2002; Sohn, Ursu, Anderson, Stenger, &amp; Carter, 2000) and switching between response alternatives (Dove, Pollman, Schubert, Wiggins, &amp; Von Cramon, 2000; Mecklinger, Von Cramon, Springer, &amp; Matthes-von Cramon, 1999; Rogers et al., 1998), as well as inhibiting inappropriate responses during strategy tasks (Dove et al., 2000; Mecklinger et al., 1999; Rogers et al., 1998; Shallice &amp; Burgess, 1991a,b). Through the use of region of interest analysis, it has been possible to determine that damage to a specific region of the PFC, namely the right inferior frontal gyrus, could account for deficits in stop-signal inhibition associated with frontal cortex damage (Aron et al., 2003). Furthermore, it has been reported that human patients with damage to ventromedial frontal cortex, incorporating the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), exhibit maladaptive decision-making and aberrant social behavior which is often described as impulsive. These patients persist in making risky choices on the Iowa gambling task (Bechara, Damasio, Damasio, &amp; Anderson, 1994; Bechara, Damasio, Damasio, &amp; Lee, 1999) and increased betting in the presence of normal probability judgements (Manes et al., 2002).

In the rat, lesions of the anterior cingulate cortex increase premature responding on the 5CSRT, whereas lesions to prelimbic cortex (analogous to dorsal PFC) impair attentional performance on the same task (Muir et al., 1996). However, large lesions of the medial PFC have not so far been found to affect performance on a stop-task in rats (Eagle &amp; Robbins, 2003b). In addition, lesions to neither anterior cingulate nor prelimbic cortex altered impulsive choice as measured by delay-discounting paradigms (Cardinal et al., 2001). However, more recently it has been observed that rats with lesions to the OFC choose less impulsively in this task i.e. they prefer the larger but more delayed reward (Winstanley et al., 2004). Although this appears initially counter-intuitive with regards to the human literature on the Iowa gambling task, both lesion results could stem from a “myopia for the future” (Damasio, 1994) i.e. the subject chooses the response associated with the large reward regardless of the consequences of that response (delay to reward, monetary loss etc.). Perseverative responding has also been observed following lesions to the OFC, as determined through use of both the 5CSRT (Chudasama et al., 2003) and reversal learning paradigms (Chudasama &amp; Robbins, 2003; Schoenbaum, Nugent, Saddoris, &amp; Setlow, 2002) indicating an inflexibility within cognitive processes that may also impact on the impulsive-type behavior seen following damage to this region.

12. The ventral striatum
Numerous studies have underlined the importance of the nucleus accumbens (NAC) in the regulation of reward-related behavior. The NAC can be divided into two anatomically distinct parts: the core and the shell (Voorn, Gerfen, &amp; Groenewegen, 1989; Zaborsky et al., 1985), which differ in terms of their patterns of innervation (Berendse, Galisdegraaf, &amp; Groenewegen, 1992; Groenewegen, Vermeulen-van der Zee, Kortschot, &amp; Witter, 1987; Voorn et al., 1989; Zaborsky et al., 1985; Zahm &amp; Brog, 1992) and function (Baldo, Sadeghian, Basso, &amp; Kelley, 2002; Corbit, Muir, &amp; Balleine, 2001; Maldonado-Irizarry &amp; Kelley, 1995; Parkinson, Olmstead, Burns, Robbins, &amp; Everitt, 1999; Parkinson, Robbins, &amp; Everitt, 1999; Sellings &amp; Clarke, 2003). The NAC is a key node in the limbic corticostriatal loop, a circuit that is heavily implicated in goal-directed behavior and the evaluation of emotional stimuli and events. The NAC receives information from areas of frontal cortex, the hippocampal system and amygdala, and projects to motor output structures such as the caudate putamen and (indirectly) the mediodorsal thalamus (Alexander, Crutcher, &amp; DeLong, 1990; Haber, Fudge, &amp; McFarland, 2000). Given this pattern of interconnectivity, it has been suggested that the NAC acts as a “limbic–motor interface”, providing an important route whereby the limbic system can influence behavior (Mogenson, Jones, &amp; Yim, 1980).

Excitotoxic lesions of the NAC core increase the number of premature responses made on the 5CSRT (Christakou, Robbins, &amp; Everitt, 2004), yet have no effect on the stop-task (Eagle &amp; Robbins, 2003b). However, damage to the NAC core markedly increases impulsive choice as measured by a delay-discounting task (Cardinal et al., 2001). More recently it has been observed that excitotoxic lesions of the basolateral amygdala (BLA), which is strongly connected to the NAC, increase impulsive choice in a similar fashion, indicating that the BLA and NAC may interact in the regulation of impulsivity (Winstanley, Theobald, Cardinal, &amp; Robbins, 2004). Furthermore, damage to the ventral striatum and septal regions in the rat has been reported to decrease conditioned suppression, and to result in excessive alcohol drinking and aggression, all of which may indicate an overall increase in impulsivity (Johansson &amp; Hansen, 2000).

Although lesions of the NAC core had no effect on performance of a rodent stop-task (Eagle &amp; Robbins, 2003b), lesions to the medial striatum in the rat, an area homologous to the caudate putamen in the human brain, produced marked deficits in stop-task performance (Eagle &amp; Robbins, 2003a). Most notably, SSRTs were significantly slower following medial striatal lesions, but the mean go response latencies (mRT) also increased, as did the number of trials omitted. The medial striatum in rats is probably homologous to regions of the caudate nucleus in humans, which has been shown to be important in the control of response inhibition in children with ADHD (Rubia, 2002; Semrud-Clikeman et al., 2000; Vaidya et al., 1998) and which may be smaller or dysfunctional in ADHD patients (Filipek et al., 1997; Rubia, 2002; Rubia et al., 1999). A recent study in human subjects also showed impaired performance on the stop-task following basal ganglia lesions (Rieger et al., 2003), although it was not possible to localise these lesions specifically to the caudate nucleus.

Medial striatal lesions also increase the incidence of premature responding on the 5CSRT (Rogers, Baunez, Everitt, &amp; Robbins, 2001), but the effects of medial striatal lesions on the delay-discounting task are as yet unknown. Whether disturbances in striatal function are responsible for many of the behavioral deficits seen in ADHD patients is unclear, may warrant further investigation. The only other structure within the basal ganglia whose role in impulsivity has been investigated is the subthalamic nucleus (STN). Lesions of the STN increase impulsive responding as assessed by the 5CSRT (Baunez &amp; Robbins, 1997), yet recent data suggest that damage to this structure decreases impulsive choice in a delay-discounting paradigm (Winstanley, Baunez, Theobald, &amp; Robbins, 2005).

13. Summary
These data broadly support the suggestion that behavioral disinhibition and delay-discounting differ in the degree to which various components of frontostriatal loops are implicated in their regulation. In particular, the dorsal prefrontal cortex does not appear to be involved in mediating impulsive choice, yet does have some role in regulating inhibitory processes. In contrast, there appears to be a pronounced role for the OFC and BLA in controlling impulsive choice. Other structures, however, such as the NAC and STN may be common to both circuits. In terms of the dual process model of ADHD, it could be argued that these data are in agreement with the hypothesis that dysfunctions in prefrontal cortex and striatal systems are involved in DTAP ADHD, whereas structures heavily implicated in reward-learning and the processing of affect such as the NAC, BLA and OFC have a more pronounced role in MSP ADHD. As yet, such a conclusion must remain tentative, but continuing evaluation of the effects of manipulating different regions of the CNS on performance of these different tests of impulsivity may enable resolution of this issue. It is important to note that different measures of motoric impulsivity are differentially affected by lesions to various brain regions, once again suggesting that impulsivity is non-unitary in nature.

14. The neurochemical basis of impulsive behavior
The following discussion will focus on the roles of the dopamine and serotonin systems in the control of impulsivity. The noradrenergic system has also been implicated in the genesis and treatment of ADHD, yet little is known about the contribution this neurotransmitter makes to the regulation of impulsive behavior. Lesions to the dorsal noradrenergic bundle have limited effects on performance of the 5CSRT, mainly affecting accuracy under certain conditions (Cador, Taylor, &amp; Robbins, 1991; Carli et al., 1983) yet their effects have not been assessed in other impulsivity paradigms. However, given the pattern of data emerging suggesting marked dissociations between the neural (see above) and neurochemical (see below) regulation of these different forms of behavior, further investigation of the noradrenergic system in preclinical studies of impulse control may prove useful.

15. The dopamine system
The most common pharmacological treatment prescribed for ADHD is the administration of amphetamine or methylphenidate, implicating dysregulation of the monoaminergic neurotransmitters, particularly dopamine or noradrenaline, in this disorder. It is seemingly paradoxical that psychostimulant drugs which increase activity should ameliorate the symptoms of ADHD, but this may be related to the rate-dependent nature of some of amphetamine's effects (Robbins &amp; Evenden, 1985; Robbins &amp; Sahakian, 1979). In support of this suggestion, amphetamine improved performance of the stop-task in both rodents and humans, but only in subjects with relatively poor baseline inhibitory performance, including those with medial striatal lesions (de Wit, Crean, &amp; Richards, 2000; Eagle &amp; Robbins, 2003a,b; Feola et al., 2000). Administration of d-amphetamine has also been shown to decrease impulsive choice in healthy human volunteers as assessed using a delay-discounting procedure (de Wit, Enggasser, &amp; Richards, 2002), and produces a similar effect in rodent delay-discounting paradigms in the majority of studies (Isles, Humby, &amp; Wilkinson, 2003; Richards, Sabol, &amp; de Wit, 1999; Wade, de Wit, &amp; Richards, 2000; Winstanley, Theobald, Dalley, &amp; Robbins, 2003) but see also (Cardinal, Robbins, &amp; Everitt, 2000; Evenden &amp; Ryan, 1996).

Hence, there appears to be a high concordance between the behavioral effects of amphetamine on impulsive behavior in both humans and rodents, at least as measured by these two behavioral paradigms. In contrast, amphetamine increases the number of premature responses made on the 5CSRT, indicative of increased rather than decreased impulsivity (Cole &amp; Robbins, 1987). This increase in impulsive responding is blocked by 6-OHDA lesions of the NAC, strongly implicating the involvement of accumbal dopamine in the actions of the psychostimulant (Cole &amp; Robbins, 1989). Furthermore, the amphetamine-induced increase in the level of premature responding is blocked by administration of the D1 receptor antagonist SCH 23390, and also by global decreases in 5-HT (Harrison, Everitt, &amp; Robbins, 1997), (see below for discussion of the role of the 5-HT system in impulsivity). The reasons why amphetamine appears to increase this measure of motoric impulsivity, yet decrease impulsive responding as measured by the stop-task, are currently unknown, but again indicate that different forms of impulsive action may have different neural bases.

The proposal that dysfunction of the dopamine (DA) system is responsible for some of the symptoms of ADHD is supported by reports of alterations in the dopamine transporter (DAT) (Dougherty et al., 1999; Krause, Dresel, Krause, Kung, &amp; Tatsch, 2000) and abnormalities in DOPA decarboxylase activity (an enzyme involved in presynaptic storage of DA) within the PFC (Ernst, Zametkin, Matochik, Jons, &amp; Cohen, 1998) in ADHD patients. Studies also suggest an association between ADHD and the dopamine D4 receptor gene polymorphism (e.g. (LaHoste et al., 1996)), and allelic versions of the DAT gene (Cook et al., 1995). Furthermore some of the behavioral abnormalities observed in the spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR), a putative animal model of ADHD, are responsive to treatment with amphetamine and methylphenidate, although the effects of these stimulants and other dopaminergic drugs appear to be blunted in the SHR e.g. (Sagvolden, 1992; van den Buuse &amp; de Jong, 1989; Yang, Amini, Swann, &amp; Dafny, 2003). Significant abnormalities have been observed in dopaminergic innervation within the SHR, particularly with respect to the NAC (Papa et al., 2002; Papa, Sergeant, &amp; Sadile, 1997; Russell, de Villiers, Sagvolden, Lamm, &amp; Taljaard, 1998). The fact that both the dopamine transporter knockout mouse (DAT KO) and rats with neonatal 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) lesions are also hyperactive, and are considered animal models of ADHD, supports the view that dopamine is integral to the ADHD syndrome (see Solanto, 1998, 2002 for review).

16. The serotonin system
The hypothesis that serotonin (5-HT) is critically involved in impulse control has been gathering momentum for over 20 years. Soubrié proposed that a common basis for a number of different behavioral effects associated with decreases in brain 5-HT levels was the disinhibition of behavior, which can be directly related to the construct of impulsivity (Soubrie, 1986). Furthermore, Linnoila and colleagues established a correlation between low levels of the 5-HT metabolite 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and impulsive rather than non-impulsive aggression (Linnoila et al., 1983). Despite these data indicating a strong association between 5-HT and impulsivity, the extent to which the 5-HT system is involved in ADHD is open to debate. Although low levels of 5-HIAA were observed in the CSF of a group of children and adolescents with disruptive behavioral disorders, including ADHD, this was found to correlate with levels of aggression rather than impulsivity per se, and could reflect the more general role of 5-HT in aggressive behavior (see Miczek, Fish, de Bold, &amp; de Almeida, 2002 for review). However, a trend has also been observed between low levels of 5-HT in the blood and the severity of ADHD symptoms (Spivak et al., 1999), indicating that this neurotransmitter could somehow be involved in the behavioral disturbances central to this disorder.

In parallel with the dopamine hypothesis, genetic studies indicate an association between ADHD and a polymorphism in the 5-HT transporter gene (Retz, Thome, Blocher, Baader, &amp; Rosler, 2002), and an allelic variant of the gene encoding the 5-HT1B receptor (Quist et al., 2003). Nevertheless, the finding that serotonin-specific re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which increase central 5-HT levels, have little or no effect in ADHD suggests that 5-HT may not be central to the aetiology of the disorder. However, in terms of other impulse-control disorders such as pathological gambling, sexual addiction and personality disorders, SSRIs have proved to offer some therapeutic benefit (Hollander &amp; Rosen, 2000).

The effects of acutely reducing levels of 5-HT in the brain through tryptophan depletion on tests of impulsivity and behavioral disinhibition have been investigated in healthy volunteers as well as clinical populations and those with a history of psychiatric disorders. In general tryptophan depletion has been found to increase impulsive responding, particularly in those with a family history of psychiatric disorders, as measured by tests of impulsive action such as the stop-task procedure, go/no-go tasks and the CPT (Crean, Richards, &amp; de Wit, 2002; LeMarquand, Benkelfat, Pihl, Palmour, &amp; Young, 1999; LeMarquand et al., 1998; Quintin et al., 2001; Walderhaug et al., 2002), yet decreasing CNS 5-HT in this way has no effect in tests of impulsive choice such as delay-discounting and a simple test of probabilistic choice (Anderson, Richell, &amp; Bradshaw, 2003). However, tryptophan depletion impairs reversal learning in an attentional set shifting task (Rogers et al., 1999) and subtly alters performance on a gambling test such that subjects did not change as much as controls in response to the size of the reward they could earn (Rogers et al., 2003). These data suggest that decreasing 5-HT does not necessarily increase impulsive choice per se, but does alter decision-making based on changes in the value of reward and rewarding stimuli.

In the rat, the hypothesis that decreasing 5-HT increases impulsive action has received widespread support. For example, globally reducing forebrain 5-HT through intracerebroventricular (ICV) infusions of the serotonergic toxin 5,7-dihydroxytryptamine, has been shown to increase premature responding on the 5CSRT and profoundly disrupted acquisition and performance of a go/no-go task (Harrison et al., 1997, 1999). However, whether decreasing 5-HT likewise increases impulsive choice in rats is less clear, as lesions to the serotonergic system have been reported to both increase impulsivity and to have no effect on performance of a delay-discounting paradigm (Bizot, Le Bihan, Puech, Hamon, &amp; Thiebot, 1999; Mobini et al., 2000; Winstanley et al., 2003, 2004; Wogar et al., 1993). Although the reasons for these discrepancies are unclear, there are a number of obvious differences between these studies, not least the use of different behavioral tasks, varying methodology, and the presence or absence of neuroprotective pre-treatment strategies prior to surgery.

However, not all studies have found an inverse relationship between 5-HT levels and impulsive action. Focusing on the 5CSRT, a recent in vivo microdialysis study using a simplified “one-choice” version of the task found that, although levels of 5-HT did not alter during performance of the task, animals that made more premature responses on the task had higher levels of 5-HT in the medial PFC (Dalley, Theobald, Eagle, Passetti, &amp; Robbins, 2002). A positive correlation has also been observed between levels of 5-HT in the right medial PFC and levels of premature responses made on the 5CSRT according to post mortem tissue analysis of trained animals (Puumala &amp; Sirvio, 1998). It is important to remember that the 5-HT system is highly complex, and over 14 different types of 5-HT receptor have currently been identified which can have both excitatory and inhibitory effects on serotonergic neurons as well as the cells they target, including dopaminergic and glutamatergic neurons. Recent evidence suggests that drugs selective for these different 5-HT receptors can have radically different effects on impulsive behavior (Evenden &amp; Ryan, 1999). In particular, whereas antagonism of the 5-HT2C receptor antagonist SB 242084 increases premature responding, the 5-HT2A receptor antagonist M100907 decreases this measure of impulsivity (Higgins, Enderlin, Haman, &amp; Fletcher, 2003; Winstanley et al., 2003). Hence, antagonism of certain 5-HT receptors can decrease impulsive responding whereas global 5-HT depletion increases impulsivity on the same behavioral measure.

The essential diversity of the 5-HT system may provide an explanation for the inconsistencies in the literature regarding the role of this neurotransmitter in ADHD and impulsivity. It is clearly oversimplistic to view the serotonergic system as a homogeneous substrate upon which pharmacological agents act to produce monotonic changes in behavior. The finding that different serotonergic manipulations can have contrasting effects on different measures of impulsivity is an important consideration when evaluating the effects of serotonergic drugs in ADHD.

17. Interaction between 5-HT and DA
There is considerable evidence indicating that 5-HT can modulate levels of DA, and it has been suggested that changes in the relative levels of these two neurotransmitters, thus altering the balance of the interactions between them, could be one of the crucial factors in the neurochemical basis of ADHD (Oades, 2002). Amphetamine does increase levels of 5-HT as well as dopamine and noradrenaline (Balcioglu, Zhang, &amp; Tarazi, 2003; Kuczenski &amp; Segal, 1989, 1995; Kuczenski, Segal, Leith, &amp; Applegate, 1987), therefore the therapeutic benefit derived from administration of amphetamine in ADHD may result in part from activation of the serotonergic system. In support of this suggestion, the hyperactivity observed in the DAT KO, a suggested rodent model of ADHD (see above), could be reduced by the 5-HT releasing agent fenfluramine, an effect which was abolished by lesions of the serotonergic system (Gainetdinov et al., 1999). Hyperactivity in rats with neonatal 6-OHDA lesions was also reduced by SSRIs, but not by inhibitors of the DAT (Davids, Zhang, Kula, Tarazi, &amp; Baldesserini, 2002).

Direct evidence for the involvement of 5-HT:DA interactions in the control of impulsive choice in rats has been recently published. Although lesions to the 5-HT system did not themselves alter delay-discounting performance, such serotonergic lesions attenuated the ability of amphetamine to decrease impulsive choice, particularly in rats with high baseline levels of impulsivity (Winstanley et al., 2003). In addition, co-administration of the mixed dopamine antagonist cis-z-flupenthixol with amphetamine did not alter the ability of the psychostimulant to decrease impulsive choice in sham-operated rats, but did block these effects of amphetamine in ICV 5,7-DHT lesioned animals. Although amphetamine has opposite effects on impulsivity as assessed by delay-discounting tasks and the 5CSRT, it is interesting to note that, in both paradigms, the behavioral effects of amphetamine are attenuated by ICV 5,7-DHT lesions (Harrison et al., 1997; Winstanley et al., 2003). The differential involvement of interactions between the 5-HT and DA systems in these distinct forms of impulsive behavior may relate to the suggestion that DTAP ADHD and MPS ADHD are partly the results of dysfunction within different branches of the dopaminergic system, although such a suggestion remains to be tested.

18. Summary
The neurotransmitter most clearly implicated in ADHD is dopamine, and data from both clinical and preclinical studies largely support this suggestion. Although there is a considerable body of literature associating the serotonin system with impulsivity, the precise role this system plays, if any, in the etiology and treatment of ADHD is yet to be determined. Preclinical evidence is mounting to suggest that 5-HT may be important in the action of amphetamine to reduce impulsive behavior, potentially via its interactions with the dopamine system. Whilst the nature of such an interaction is still unclear, further investigation of this issue may provide valuable insight into the neurochemical basis of ADHD.

19. Discussion
The body of data reviewed here highlights the advances that have been made in understanding the neurobiological basis of impulsivity through empirical investigation of behavior within the laboratory setting. Through designing behavioral paradigms for use with rodents and other laboratory animals based on human neuropsychological tests, it has proved possible to replicate findings between species, and to validate the utility of such a behavioral test strategy to investigate impulsive behavior. Such experiments have highlighted the role of frontostriatal circuits in impulse control in both humans and rodents e.g. (Aron et al., 2003; Bechara et al., Lee, 1999; Cardinal, Pennicott, Sugathapala, Robbins, &amp; Everitt, 2001; Christakou et al., 2004; Muir et al., 1996; Winstanley et al., 2004), but also suggest that different, yet converging, pathways may regulate distinct aspects of impulsive behavior. This fractionation of impulsivity, both in terms of behavioral output, neural basis and neurochemical modulation, may illuminate some issues regarding the nature of ADHD. In particular, this literature supports the suggestion that more than one subtype of ADHD may exist, characterised by similar symptoms that may differ in severity, yet which are caused by dysfunction within different brain systems.

Further work to delineate the precise roles of different regions of the brain in the control of different forms of impulsive behavior clearly remains to be done in order to establish a more complete picture of the areas and circuits involved in various forms of impulsivity. The identification of the common as well as the unique involvement of different areas may further our understanding of the complex pattern of data gathered from populations of patients with impulse control disorders, and predict and support hypotheses regarding therapeutic strategies and origins of such syndromes. Appreciation of the complexity of the different neurotransmitter systems implicated in impulsivity and ADHD, and the interactions between them, may lead to further advances in pharmacological control of impulsivity. In particular, preclinical studies indicate that drugs that are selective for particular receptor subtypes may have distinct and more pronounced effects than globally acting drugs. Future work may establish such agents as useful adjuncts to more traditional pharmacotherapy for impulse control disorders.

To conclude, both clinical and preclinical studies have made valuable contributions to our understanding of impulsivity and its involvement in ADHD. The considerable translation possible between the behavioral models in both rats and humans has enriched and advanced our comprehension of the neurobiological basis of these behaviors. Continuing communication and exchange of ideas between neuroscientists and neuropsychologists working in these fields can only be beneficial in advancing progress in this area.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a Wellcome Trust Programme grant and completed within the MRC Centre for Behavioral and Clinical Neuroscience. CAW was supported by an MRC Studentship.

Fig. 1 Impulsive choice and preference reversal as predicted by hyperbolic discounting functions (adapted from Ainslie, 1975). Hyperbolic discounting models predict that a larger but more delayed reward will be valued more highly when the choice is made far in advance of its delivery (towards the left of the graph). However, as time advances, and the difference between the delay to the small reward is judged as being considerably less than the delay to the large reward, preference switches so that the small reward is deemed to be more valuable.

Table 1 Simple summary of the effects of lesions to different brain regions on various tests of impulsivity in the rat

Region	Stop-task	Delay-discounting	5CSRT	
PRL	
↔
	
↔
	
↔
	
IL	
?
	
↔
	
↑
	
ACx	
?
	
↔
	
↑
	
OFC	
?
	
↓
	
↑
	
NAC	
↔
	
↑
	
↑
	
Medial striatum	
↑
	
?
	
↑
	
STN	
?
	
↓
	
↑
	
↔ no effect on performance

↑ increase in impulsive behavior

↓ decrease in impulsive behavior

? effects unknown.

Abbreviations: 5CSRT five-choice serial reaction time task; PrL prelimbic cortex; IL infralimbic cortex; ACx anterior cingulate cortex; OFC orbitofrontal cortex; NAC nucleus accumbens; STN subthalamic nucleus.


   References
Ainslie G   Specious reward: A behavioral theory of impulsiveness and impulse control Psychological Bulletin 1975 82 4 463 498 1099599 
Alexander GE  Crutcher MD  DeLong MR   Basal ganglia-thalamocortical circuits-parallel substrates for motor, oculomotor, prefrontal and limbic functions Progress in Brain Research 1990 85 119 146 2094891 
American Psychiatric Association Diagnostic and Statistical Manual IV 1994 Washington, DC American Psychiatric Association 
Anderson IM  Richell RA  Bradshaw CM   The effect of acute tryptophan depletion on probabilistic choice Journal of Psychopharmacology 2003 17 1 3 7 12680734 
Arnsten AFT   Catecholamine modulation of prefrontal cortical cognitive function Trends in Cognitive Sciences 1997 2 11 436 447 21227275 
Arnsten AFT   The biology of being frazzled Science 1998 280 1711 1712 9660710 
Aron AR  Fletcher PC  Bullmore ET  Sahakian BJ  Robbins TW   Stop-signal inhibition disrupted by damage to right inferior frontal gyrus in humans Nature Neuroscience 2003 6 2 115 116 
Balcioglu A  Zhang K  Tarazi FI   Dopamine depletion abolishes apomorphine- and amphetamine-induced increases in extracellular serotonin levels in the striatum of conscious rats: A microdialysis study Neuroscience 2003 119 4 1045 1053 12831863 
Baldo BA  Sadeghian K  Basso AM  Kelley AE   Effects of selective dopamine D1 or D2 receptor blockade within nucleus accumbens subregions on ingestive behavior and associated motor activity Behavioural Brain Research 2002 137 165 177 12445722 
Band GPH  Van Boxtel GJM   Inhibitory motor control in stop paradigms: Review and reinterpretation of neural mechanisms Acta Physiologica Scandinavica 1999 101 179 211 
Barratt ES   Monahan J  Steadman HJ   Impulsiveness and aggression Violence and mental disorder 1994 61 79 Chicago University of Chicago Press 
Baunez C  Robbins TW   Bilateral lesions of the subthalamic nucleus induce multiple deficits in an attentional task in rats European Journal of Neuroscience 1997 9 10 2086 2099 9421169 
Bechara A  Damasio AR  Damasio H  Anderson SW   Insensitivity to future consequences following damage to human prefrontal cortex Cognition 1994 50 7 15 8039375 
Bechara A  Damasio H  Damasio AR  Lee GP   Different contributions of the human amygdala and ventromedial prefrontal cortex to decision-making Journal of Neuroscience 1999 19 13 5473 5481 10377356 
Bedard AC  Ickowicz A  Logan GD  Hogg-Johnson S  Schachar R  Tannock R   Selective inhibition in children with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder off and on stimulant medication Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 2003 31 315 327 12774864 
Berendse HW  Galisdegraaf Y  Groenewegen HJ   Topographical organisation and relationship with ventral striatal compartments of prefrontal corticostriatal projections in the rat Journal of Comparative Neurology 1992 316 314 347 1577988 
Bizot JC  Le Bihan C  Puech AJ  Hamon M  Thiebot MH   Serotonin and tolerance to delay of reward in rats Psychopharmacology 1999 146 4 400 412 10550490 
Brass M  Von Cramon DY   The role of the frontal cortex in task preparation Cerebral Cortex 2002 12 908 914 12183390 
Cador M  Taylor JR  Robbins TW   Potentiation of the effects of reward-related stimuli by dopaminergic-dependent mechanisms in the nucleus-accumbens Psychopharmacology 1991 104 3 377 385 1924645 
Cardinal RN  Pennicott DR  Sugathapala CL  Robbins TW  Everitt BJ   Impulsive choice induced in rats by lesions of the nucleus accumbens core Science 2001 292 5526 2499 2501 11375482 
Cardinal RN  Robbins TW  Everitt BJ   The effects of d -amphetamine, chlordiazepoxide, alpha-flupenthixol and behavioural manipulations on choice of signalled and unsignalled delayed reinforcement in rats Psychopharmacology 2000 152 4 362 375 11140328 
Carli M  Robbins TW  Evenden JL  Everitt BJ   Effects of lesions to ascending noradrenergic neurons on performance of a 5-choice serial reaction time task in rats — Implications for theories of dorsal noradrenergic bundle function based on selective attention and arousal Behavioural Brain Research 1983 9 3 361 380 6639741 
Castellanos FX  Tannock R   Neuroscience of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: The search for endophenotypes Nature reviews. Neuroscience 2002 3 8 617 628 
Chao LL  Knight RT   Human prefrontal lesions increase distractibility to irrelevant sensory inputs NeuroReport 1995 21 1605 1610 8527724 
Christakou A  Robbins TW  Everitt BJ   Prefrontal–ventral striatal systems involved in affective modulation of attentional performance: Implications for corticostriatal circuitry function Journal of Neuroscience 2004 24 4 773 780 14749421 
Chudasama Y  Passetti F  Rhodes SEV  Lopian D  Desai A  Robbins TW   Dissociable aspects of performance on the 5 choice serial reaction time task following lesions of the dorsal anterior cingulate, infralimbic and orbitofrontal cortex in the rat: Differential effects on selectivity, impulsivity and compulsivity Behavioural Brain Research 2003 146 105 119 14643464 
Chudasama Y  Robbins TW   Dissociable contributions of the orbitofrontal and infralimbic cortex to pavlovian autoshaping and discrimination reversal learning: Further evidence for the functional heterogeneity of the rodent frontal cortex Journal of Neuroscience 2003 23 8771 8780 14507977 
Cloninger CR   A systematic method for clinical description and classification of personality variants Archives of General Psychiatry 1987 44 573 588 3579504 
Cole BJ  Robbins TW   Amphetamine impairs the discriminative performance of rats with dorsal noradrenergic bundle lesions on a 5-choice serial reaction time task: New evidence for central dopaminergic–noradrenergic interactions Psychopharmacology 1987 91 458 466 3108926 
Cole BJ  Robbins TW   Effects of 6-hydroxydopamine lesions of the nucleus accumbens septi on performance of a 5-choice serial reaction time task in rats — Implications for theories of selective attention and arousal Behavioural Brain Research 1989 33 2 165 179 2504222 
Cook EHJ  Stein MA  Krasowski MD  Cox NJ  Olkon DM  Kieffer JE    Association of attention-deficit disorder and the dopamine transporter gene American Journal of Human Genetics 1995 56 4 993 998 7717410 
Corbit LH  Muir JL  Balleine BW   The role of the nucleus accumbens in instrumental conditioning: Evidence of a functional dissociation between accumbens core and shell Journal of Neuroscience 2001 21 9 3251 3260 11312310 
Crean J  Richards JB  de Wit H   Effect of tryptophan depletion on impulsive behavior in men with or without a family history of alcoholism Behavioural Brain Research 2002 136 2 349 357 12429396 
Dalley JW  Theobald DE  Eagle DM  Passetti F  Robbins TW   Deficits in impulse control associated with tonically elevated serotonergic function in rat prefrontal cortex Neuropsychopharmacology 2002 26 6 716 728 12007742 
Damasio AR   Descartes' error 1994 New York Putman 
Daruna JH  Barnes PA   McCown WG  Johnson JL  Shure MB   A neurodevelopmental view of impulsivity The impulsive client: Theory, research and treatment 1993 23 Washington, D.C. American Psychological Association 
Davids E  Zhang K  Kula NS  Tarazi FI  Baldesserini RJ   Effects of norepinephrine and serotonin transporter inhibitors on hyperactivity induced by neonatal 6-hydroxydopamine lesioning in rats Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 2002 301 3 1097 1102 12023542 
de Wit H  Crean J  Richards JB   Effects of d -amphetamine and ethanol on a measure of behavioral inhibition in humans Behavioral Neuroscience 2000 114 4 830 837 10959541 
de Wit H  Enggasser JL  Richards JB   Acute administration of d -amphetamine decreases impulsivity in healthy volunteers Neuropsychopharmacology 2002 27 5 813 825 12431855 
Dougherty DD  Bonab AA  Spencer TJ  Rauch SL  Madras BK  Fischman AJ   Dopamine transporter density in patients with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder The Lancet 1999 354 2132 2133 
Dove A  Pollman S  Schubert T  Wiggins CJ  Von Cramon DY   Prefrontal cortex activation in task switching: An event related fMRI study Brain Research: Cognition and Brain Research 2000 9 103 109 
Eagle DM  Robbins TW   Inhibitory control in rats performing a stop-signal reaction-time task: Effects of lesions of the medial striatum and d -amphetamine Behavioral Neuroscience 2003a 117 6 1302 1317 14674849 
Eagle DM  Robbins TW   Lesions of the medial prefrontal cortex or nucleus accumbens core do not impair inhibitory control in rats performing a stop-signal reaction time task Behavioural Brain Research 2003b 146 131 144 14643466 
Epstein JN  Erkanli A  Conners CK  Klaric J  Costello JE  Angold A   Relations between Continuous Performance Test performance measures and ADHD behaviors Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 2003 31 5 543 554 14561061 
Ernst M  Zametkin AJ  Matochik JA  Jons PH  Cohen RM   DOPA decarboxylase activity in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder adults. A [flourine-18]flourodopa positron emission tomographic study Journal of Neuroscience 1998 18 15 5901 5907 9671677 
Evenden JL   Varieties of impulsivity Psychopharmacology 1999 146 4 348 361 10550486 
Evenden JL  Ryan CN   The pharmacology of impulsive behaviour in rats: The effects of drugs on response choice with varying delays of reinforcement Psychopharmacology 1996 128 2 161 170 8956377 
Evenden JL  Ryan CN   The pharmacology of impulsive behaviour in rats VI: The effects of ethanol and selective serotonergic drugs on response choice with varying delays of reinforcement Psychopharmacology 1999 146 4 413 421 10550491 
Eysenck SBG   McCown WG  Johnson JL  Shure MB   The I7: Development of a measure of impulsivity and its relationship to the superfactors of personality The impulsive client: Theory, research and treatment 1993 Washington, D.C. American Psychological Association 
Eysenck SBG  Eysenck HJ   The place of impulsivity in a dimensional system of personality description British Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology 1977 16 57 68 843784 
Feola TW  de Wit H  Richards JB   Effects of-amphetamine and alcohol on a measure of behavioral inhibition in rats Behavioral Neuroscience 2000 114 4 838 848 10959542 
Filipek P  Semrud-Clikeman M  Steingard RJ  Renshaw PF  Kennedy DN  Biederman J   Volumetric MRI analysis comparing subjects having attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder with normal controls Neurology 1997 48 589 601 9065532 
Gainetdinov RR  Wetsel WC  Jones SR  Levin ED  Jaber M  Caron MG   Role of serotonin in the paradoxical calming effect of psychostimulants on hyperactivity Science 1999 283 5400 397 401 9888856 
Groenewegen HJ  Vermeulen-van der Zee E  Kortschot AT  Witter MP   Organization of the projections from the subiculum to the ventral striatum in the rat: A study using anterograde transport of phaseolus-vulgaris leucoagglutinin Neuroscience 1987 23 103 120 3683859 
Haber SN  Fudge JL  McFarland NR   Striatonigral pathways in primates form an ascending spiral from the shell to the dorsolateral striatum Journal of Neuroscience 2000 20 2369 2382 10704511 
Harrison AA  Everitt BJ  Robbins TW   Central 5-HT depletion enhances impulsive responding without affecting the accuracy of attentional performance: Interactions with dopaminergic mechanisms Psychopharmacology 1997 133 4 329 342 9372531 
Harrison AA  Everitt BJ  Robbins TW   Central serotonin depletion impairs both the acquisition and performance of a symmetrically reinforced go/no-go conditional visual discrimination Behavioural Brain Research 1999 100 1–2 99 112 10212057 
Hesslinger B  Tebartz van Elst L  Thiel T  Haegele K  Hennig J  Ebert D   Frontoorbital volume reductions in adult patients with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder Neuroscience Letters 2002 328 3 319 321 12147334 
Higgins GA  Enderlin M  Haman M  Fletcher PJ   The 5-HT2A receptor antagonist M100,907 attenuates motor and “impulsive-like” behaviours produced by NMDA receptor antagonism Psychopharmacology 2003 170 309 319 12904968 
Hollander E  Rosen J   Impulsivity Journal of Psychopharmacology 2000 14 S1 2 s39 s44 10888030 
Isles AR  Humby T  Wilkinson LO   Measuring impulsivity in mice using a novel operant delayed reinforcement task: Effects of behavioural manipulations and d -amphetamine Psychopharmacology 2003 (Electronic publication, doi:10.1007/s00213-00003-01551-00216) 
Itami S  Uno H   Orbitofrontal cortex dysfunction in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder revealed by reversal and extinction tasks NeuroReport 2002 13 18 2453 2457 12499848 
Jentsch JD  Taylor JR   Impulsivity resulting from frontostriatal dysfunction in drug abuse: Implications for the control of behavior by reward-related stimuli Psychopharmacology 1999 146 373 390 10550488 
Johansson AK  Hansen S   Increased alcohol intake and behavioral disinhibition in rats with ventral striatal neuronal loss Physiology and Behavior 2000 70 453 463 11110998 
Kramer AF  Humphrey DG  Larish JF  Logan GD  Strayer DL   Aging and inhibition — Beyond a unitary view of inhibitory processing in attention Psychology and Aging 1994 9 4 491 512 7893421 
Krause K-H  Dresel SH  Krause J  Kung HF  Tatsch K   Increased striatal dopamine transporter in adult patients with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: Effects of methylphenidate as measured by single photon emission computed tomography Neuroscience Letters 2000 285 107 110 10793238 
Kuczenski R  Segal DS   Concomitant characterisation of behavioral and striatal neurotransmitter response to amphetamine using in vivo microdialysis Journal of Neuroscience 1989 9 6 2051 2065 2566664 
Kuczenski R  Segal DS   Hippocampus norepinephrine, caudate dopamine and serotonin, and behavioral responses to the stereoisomers of amphetamine and methamphetamine Journal of Neuroscience 1995 15 2 1306 1317 
Kuczenski R  Segal DS  Leith NJ  Applegate CD   Effects of amphetamine, methylphenidate, and apomorphine on regional brain serotonin and 5-hydroxyindole acetic acid Psychopharmacology 1987 93 329 335 2448842 
Kuntsi J  Oosterlaan J  Stevenson J   Psychological mechanisms in hyperactivity: I. Response inhibition deficit, working memory impairment, delay aversion, or something else? Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 2001 42 199 210 11280416 
LaHoste GJ  Swanson JM  Wigal SB  Glabe C  Wigal T  King N    Dopamine D4 receptor gene polymorphism is associated with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder Molecular Psychiatry 1996 1 121 124 9118321 
LeMarquand DG  Benkelfat C  Pihl RO  Palmour RM  Young SN   Behavioral disinhibition induced by tryptophan depletion in nonalcoholic young men with multigenerational family histories of paternal alcoholism American Journal of Psychiatry 1999 156 11 1771 1779 10553742 
LeMarquand DG  Pihl RO  Young SN  Tremblay RE  Seguin JR  Palmour RM    Tryptophan depletion, executive functions, and disinhibition in aggressive, adolescent males Neuropsychopharmacology 1998 19 4 333 341 9718596 
Linnoila M  Virkkunen M  Scheinin M  Nuutila A  Rimon R  Goodwin FK   Low cerebrospinal-fluid 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid concentration differentiates impulsive from nonimpulsive violent behavior Life Sciences 1983 33 26 2609 2614 6198573 
Logan GD   Dagenbach D  Carr TH   On the ability to inhibit thought and action. A users' guide to the stop signal paradigm Inhibitory processes in attention, memory and language 1994 189 236 San Diego Academic Press 
Logan GD  Cowan WB   On the ability to inhibit thought and action — A theory of an act of control Psychological Review 1984 91 3 295 327 
Logan GD  Schachar R  Tannock R   Impulsivity and inhibitory control Psychological Science 1997 8 1 60 64 
Logue AW   Research on self-control — An integrating framework Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1988 11 2 665 709 
Maldonado-Irizarry CS  Kelley AE   Excitotoxic lesions of the core and shell subregions of the nucleus accumbens differentially disrupt body weight regulation and motor activity in rat Brain Research Bulletin 1995 38 551 559 8590077 
Manes F  Sahakian BJ  Clark L  Rogers RD  Antoun N  Aitken M    Decision-making processes following damage to prefrontal cortex Brain 2002 125 624 639 11872618 
Mazur J   Commons MJ,ML  Nevin JA  Rachlin HC   An adjusting procedure for studying delayed reinforcement Quantitative analyses of behaviour: The effect of delay and intervening events on reinforcement value 1987 5 55 73 Hillsdale, N.J. Erlbaum 
McDonald J  Schleifer L  Richards JB  de Wit H   Effects of THC on behavioral measures of impulsivity in humans Neuropsychopharmacology 2003 28 7 1356 1365 12784123 
Mecklinger AD  Von Cramon DY  Springer A  Matthes-von Cramon G   Executive control functions in task switching: Evidence from brain injured patients Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 1999 21 606 619 10572281 
Miczek KA  Fish EW  de Bold JF  de Almeida RMM   Social and neural determinants of aggressive behavior: Pharmacotherapeutic targets at serotonin, dopmaine and gamma-aminobutyric acid systems Psychopharmacology 2002 163 434 458 12373445 
Mobini S  Chiang TJ  Ho MY  Bradshaw CM  Szabadi E   Effects of central 5-hydroxytryptamine depletion on sensitivity to delayed and probabilistic reinforcement Psychopharmacology 2000 152 4 390 397 11140331 
Moeller FG  Barratt ES  Dougherty DM  Schmitz JM  Swann AC   Psychiatric aspects of impulsivity American Journal of Psychiatry 2001 158 1783 1793 11691682 
Mogenson GJ  Jones DL  Yim CY   From motivation to action: Functional interface between the limbic system and the motor system Progress in Neurobiology 1980 14 69 97 6999537 
Muir JL  Everitt BJ  Robbins TW   The cerebral cortex of the rat and visual attentional function: Dissociable effects of mediofrontal, cingulate, anterior dorsolateral, and parietal cortex lesions on a five-choice serial reaction time task Cerebral Cortex 1996 6 3 470 481 8670672 
Nigg J   The AD/HD response-inhibition deficit as measured by the stop task: Replication with DSM-IV combined type— extension and qualification Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 1999 27 393 402 10582840 
Nigg JT   On inhibition/disinhibition in developmental psychopathology: Views from cognitive and personality psychology and a working inhibition taxonomy Psychological Bulletin 2000 126 2 220 246 10748641 
Nigg JT   Response inhibition and disruptive behaviors: Toward a multiprocess conception of etiological heterogeneity for ADHD combined type and conduct disorder early-onset type Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 2003 1008 170 182 14998883 
Oades RD   Dopamine may be ‘hyper’ with respect to noradrenaline metabolism, but ‘hypo’ with respect to serotonin metabolism in children with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder Behavioural Brain Research 2002 130 97 102 11864724 
Oosterlaan J  Logan GD  Sergeant JA   Response inhibition in AD/HD, CD, co-morbid AD/HD+ CD, anxious and control children: A meta-analysis of studies with the stop task Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 1998 39 411 425 9670096 
Overtoom CCE  Kenemans JL  Verbaten MN  Kemmer C  van der Molen MW  van Engeland H    Inhibition in children with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: A psychophysiological study of the stop task Biological Psychiatry 2002 51 8 668 676 11955467 
Overtoom CCE  Verbaten MN  Kemner C  Kenemans JL  van Engeland H  Buitelaar JK    Effects of methylphenidate, desipramine, and l -dopa on attention and inhibition in children with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Behavioural Brain Research 2003 145 7 15 14529800 
Papa M  Diewald L  Carey MP  Esposito FJ  Carnevale UAG  Sadile AG   A rostro-caudal dissociation in the dorsal and ventral striatum of the juvenile SHR suggests an anterior hypo- and a posterior hyperfunctioning mesocorticolimbic system Behavioural Brain Research 2002 130 1–2 171 179 11864732 
Papa M  Sergeant JA  Sadile AG   Differential expression of transcription factors in the accumbens of an animal model of ADHD NeuroReport 1997 8 7 1607 1612 9189900 
Parkinson JA  Olmstead MC  Burns LH  Robbins TW  Everitt BJ   Dissociation in effects of lesions of the nucleus accumbens core and shell on appetitive pavlovian approach behavior and the potentiation of conditioned reinforcement and locomotor activity by d -amphetamine Journal of Neuroscience 1999 19 6 2401 2411 10066290 
Parkinson JA  Robbins TW  Everitt BJ   Selective excitotoxic lesions of the nucleus accumbens core and shell differentially affect aversive Pavlovian conditioning to discrete and contextual cues Psychobiology 1999 27 2 256 266 
Passetti F  Chudasama Y  Robbins TW   The frontal cortex of the rat and visual attentional performance: Dissociable functions of distinct medial prefrontal subregions Cerebral Cortex 2002 12 12 1254 1268 12427677 
Pietras CJ  Cherek DR  Lane SD  Tcheremissine OV  Steinberg JL   Effects of methlyphenidate on impulsive choice in adult humans Psychopharmacology 2003 170 390 398 13680085 
Purvis KL  Tannock R   Phonological processing, not inhibitory control, differentiates ADHD and reading disability Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 2000 39 485 494 10761351 
Puumala T  Sirvio J   Changes in activities of dopamine and serotonin systems in the frontal cortex underlie poor choice accuracy and impulsivity of rats in an attention task Neuroscience 1998 83 2 489 499 9460757 
Quintin P  Benkelfat C  Launay JM  Arnulf I  Pointereau-Bellenger A  Barbault S    Clinical and neurochemical effect of acute tryptophan depletion in unaffected relatives of patients with bipolar affective disorder Biological Psychiatry 2001 50 3 184 190 11513817 
Quist JL  Barr CL  Schachar R  Roberts W  Malone M  Tannock R    The serotonin 5-HT1B receptor gene and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder Molecular Psychiatry 2003 8 98 102 12556913 
Retz W  Thome J  Blocher D  Baader M  Rosler M   Association of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder-related psychopathology and personality traits with the serotonin transporter promoter region polymorphism Neuroscience Letters 2002 319 133 136 11834311 
Richards JB  Mitchell SH  de Wit H  Seiden LS   Determination of discount functions in rats with an adjusting-amount procedure Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 1997 67 353 366 9163939 
Richards JB  Sabol KE  de Wit H   Effects of methamphetamine on the adjusting amount procedure, a model of impulsive behavior in rats Psychopharmacology 1999 146 4 432 439 10550493 
Rieger M  Gauggel S  Burmeister K   Inhibition of ongoing responses following frontal, nonfrontal, and basal ganglia lesions Neuropsychology 2003 17 2 272 282 12803433 
Robbins TW   Chemical neuromodulation of frontal-executive functions in humans and other animals Experimental Brain Research 2000 133 1 130 138 
Robbins TW  Evenden JL   Lowe CF  Blackman DE  Richelle M   Rate-independent approaches to the analysis of the behavioural effects of drugs Behaviour analysis and contemporary psychology 1985 217 256 London Erlbaum 
Robbins TW  Sahakian BJ   “Paradoxical” effects of psychomotor stimulant drugs in hyperactive children from the standpoint of behavioural pharmacology Neuropharmacology 1979 18 931 950 43484 
Rogers RD  Baunez C  Everitt BJ  Robbins TW   Lesions of the medial and lateral striatum in the rat produce differential deficits in attentional performance Behavioral Neuroscience 2001 115 799 811 11508719 
Rogers RD  Blackshaw AD  Middleton HC  Matthews K  Hawtin K  Crowley C    Tryptophan depletion impairs stimulus-reward learning while methylphenidate disrupts attentional control in healthy young adults: Implications for the monaminergic basis of impulsive behaviour Psychopharmacology 1999 146 482 491 10550499 
Rogers RD  Sahakian BJ  Hodges JR  Polkey CE  Kennard C  Robbins TW   Dissociating executive mechanisms for task control following frontal lobe damage and Parkinson's disease Brain 1998 121 815 842 9619187 
Rogers RD  Tunbridge EM  Bhagwagar Z  Drevets WC  Sahakian BJ  Carter CS   Tryptophan depletion alters decision-making of healthy volunteers through altered processing of reward cues Neuropsychopharmacology 2003 28 1 153 162 12496952 
Rosvold HE  Mirsky AF  Sarason I  Bransome ED  Beck LH   A continuous performance test of brain damage Journal of Consulting Psychology 1956 20 343 350 13367264 
Rubia K   The dynamic approach to neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders: Use of fMRI combined with neuropsychology to elucidate the dynamics of psychiatric disorders, exemplified in ADHD and schizophrenia Behavioural Brain Research 2002 130 47 56 11864717 
Rubia K  Oosterlaan J  Sergeant JA  Brandeis D  v. Leeuwen T   Inhibitory deficits in hyperactive boys Behavioural Brain Research 1998 94 25 32 9708836 
Rubia K  Overmeyer S  Taylor E  Brammer M  Williams SCR  Simmons A    Hypofrontality in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder during higher-order motor control: A study with functional MRI American Journal of Psychiatry 1999 156 891 896 10360128 
Russell V  de Villiers A  Sagvolden T  Lamm M  Taljaard J   Differences between electrically-, ritalin-and d -amphetamine-stimulated release of [3H]dopamine from brain slices suggest impaired vesicular storage of dopamine in an animal model of Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Behavioural Brain Research 1998 94 163 171 9708847 
Sagvolden T   The spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR) as an animal model of childhood hyperactivity (ADHD): Changed reactivity to reinforcers and to psychomotor stimulants Behavioral and Neural Biology 1992 58 103 112 1360797 
Schachar R  Logan GD   Impulsivity and inhibitory control in normal development and childhood psychopathology Developmental Psychology 1990 26 5 710 720 
Schachar R  Tannock R  Marriott M  Logan GD   Deficient inhibitory control in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 1995 23 4 411 437 7560554 
Schoenbaum G  Nugent S  Saddoris MP  Setlow B   Orbitofrontal lesions in rats impair reversal but not acquisition of a go,no-go odor discriminations NeuroReport 2002 13 885 890 11997707 
Schweitzer JB  Sulzer-Azaroff B   Self-control in boys with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: Effects of added stimulation and time Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 1995 36 4 671 686 7650090 
Sellings LHL  Clarke PBS   Segregation of amphetamine reward and locomotor stimulation between nucleus accumbens medial shell and core Journal of Neuroscience 2003 23 15 6295 6303 12867514 
Semrud-Clikeman M  Steingard RJ  Filipek P  Biederman J  Bekken K  Renshaw PF   Using MRI to examine brain–behavior relationships in males with attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 2000 39 477 484 10761350 
Sergeant JA   The cognitive-energetic model: An empirical approach to Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 2000 24 7 12 10654654 
Shallice T  Burgess PW   Deficits in strategy applications following frontal lobe damage in man Brain 1991a 114 727 741 Brain 2043945 
Shallice T  Burgess PW   Levin HS  Eisenberg HM  Benton AL   Higher-order cognitive impairments and frontal lobe lesions in man Frontal lobe and injury 1991b 125 138 New York Oxford University Press 
Shue KL  Douglas VI   Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and the frontal lobe syndrome Brain and Cognition 1992 20 104 124 1389116 
Sohn MH  Ursu S  Anderson JR  Stenger VA  Carter CS   Inaugural article: The role of prefrontal cortex and posterior parietal cortex in task swicthcing Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2000 97 13448 13453 11069306 
Solanto MV   Neuropsychopharmacological mechanisms of stimulant drug action in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: A review and integration Behavioural Brain Research 1998 94 1 127 152 9708845 
Solanto MV   Dopamine dysfunction in AD/HD: Integrating clinical and basic neuroscience research Behavioural Brain Research 2002 130 1–2 65 71 11864719 
Solanto MV  Abikoff H  Sonuga-Barke EJS  Schachar R  Logan GD  Wigal T    The ecological validity of delay aversion and response inhibition as measures of impulsivity in AD/HD: A supplement to the NIMH multi-modal treatment study of AD/HD Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 2001 215 228 11411784 
Sonuga-Barke EJS   Psychological heterogeneity in AD/HD — A dual pathway model of behaviour and cognition Behavioural Brain Research 2002 130 1–2 29 36 11864715 
Sonuga-Barke EJS   The dual pathway model of AD/HD: An elaboration of neuro-developmental characteristics Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 2003 27 593 604 14624804 
Sonuga-Barke EJS  Taylor E  Sembi S  Smith J   Hyperactivity and Delay Aversion I: The effect of delay on choice Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 1992 33 387 398 1564081 
Sonuga-Barke EJS  Williams E  Hall M  Saxton T   Hyperactivity and Delay Aversion III: The effect on cognitive style of imposing delay after errors Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 1996 37 189 194 8682898 
Soubrie P   Reconciling the role of central serotonin neurons in human and animal behavior The Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1986 9 319 364 
Spivak B  Vered Y  Yoran-Hegesh R  Averbuch E  Mester R  Graf E    Circulatory levels of catecholamines, serotonin and lipids in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 1999 99 300 304 10223434 
Tannock R   Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: Advances in cognitive, neurobiological, and genetic research Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 1998 39 1 65 99 9534087 
Tannock R  Schachar R  Carr RP  Chajczyk D  Logan GD   Effects of methylphenidate on inhibitory control in hyperactive children Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 1989 17 5 473 491 2681316 
Vaidya CJ  Austin G  Kirkorian G  Ridlehuber HW  Desmond JE  Glover GH    Selective effects of methylphenidate in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: A functional magnetic resonance study Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1998 95 14494 14499 9826728 
van den Buuse M  de Jong W   Differential effects of dopaminergic drugs on open-field behavior of spontaneously hypertensive rats and normotensive Wistar–Kyoto rats Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 1989 248 1189 1196 2564890 
Voorn P  Gerfen CR  Groenewegen HJ   Compartmental organisation of the ventral striatum of the rat: Immunohistochemical distribution of enkephalin, substance-p, dopamine and calcium-binding protein Journal of Comparative Neurology 1989 289 189 201 2478598 
Wade TR  de Wit H  Richards JB   Effects of dopaminergic drugs on delayed reward as a measure of impulsive behavior in rats Psychopharmacology 2000 150 1 90 101 10867981 
Walderhaug E  Lunde H  Nordvik JE  Landro NI  Refsum H  Magnusson A   Lowering of serotonin by rapid tryptophan depletion increases impulsiveness in normal individuals Psychopharmacology 2002 164 385 391 12457268 
Wilkins AJ  Shallice T  McCarthy R   Frontal lesions and sustained attention Neuropsychologia 1987 25 359 365 3601041 
Wilkinson RT   Interaction of noise with knowledge of results and sleep deprivation Journal of Experimental Psychology 1963 66 4 332 337 14051850 
Winstanley CA  Baunez C  Theobald DE  Robbins TW   Lesions to the subthalamic nucleus decrease impulsive choice but impair autoshaping in rats: The importance of the basal ganglia in Pavlovian conditioning and impulse control European Journal of Neuroscience 2005 21 11 3107 3116 15978020 
Winstanley CA  Chudasama Y  Dalley JW  Theobald DE  Glennon JC  Robbins TW   Intra-prefrontal 8-OH-DPAT and M100907 improve visuospatial attention and decrease impulsivity on the five-choice serial reaction time task in rats Psychopharmacology 2003 167 304 314 12677356 
Winstanley CA  Theobald DE  Cardinal RN  Robbins TW   Contrasting roles for basolateral amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex in impulsive choice Journal of Neuroscience 2004 24 4718 4722 15152031 
Winstanley CA  Theobald DE  Dalley JW  Robbins TW   Global 5-HT depletion attenuates the ability of amphetamine to decrease impulsive choice in rats Psychopharmacology 2003 170 320 331 12955303 
Winstanley CA  Theobald DE  Dalley JW  Robbins TW   Fractionating impulsivity: Contrasting effects of central 5-HT depletion on different measures of impulsive behavior Neuropsychopharmacology 2004 29 7 1331 1343 (first published on-line aon 1339th February 2004 at http://www.acnp.org/citations/NPP02090403391/default.pdf ) 15054475 
Wogar MA  Bradshaw CM  Szabadi E   Effects of lesions of the ascending 5-hydroxytryptaminergic pathways on choice between delayed reinforcers Psychopharmacology 1993 111 2 239 243 7870958 
Woods DL  Knight RT   Electrophysiologic evidence of increased distractibility after dorsolateral prefrontal lesions Neurology 1986 36 2 212 216 3945393 
Yang PB  Amini B  Swann AC  Dafny N   Strain differences in the behavioral responses of male rats to chronically administered methylphenidate Brain Research 2003 971 139 152 12706230 
Zaborsky L  Alheid GF  Beinfield MC  Eiden LE  Heimer L  Palkovits M   Cholecystokinin innervation of the ventral striatum: A morphological and radioimmunological study Neuroscience 1985 14 427 453 3887206 
Zahm DS  Brog JS   On the significance of subterritories in the accumbens part of the rat ventral striatum Neuroscience 1992 50 751 767 1448200 

