LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   Proc Biol Sci
Proceedings. Biological sciences / The Royal Society
0962-8452 1471-2954 

16048766
1559843
10.1098/rspb.2005.3056
UKPMCPA133
Article
Review
Problems with mitochondrial DNA as a marker in population, phylogeographic and phylogenetic studies: the effects of inherited symbionts
Hurst Gregory D. D. 1* Jiggins Francis M. 2 1 Department of Biology, University College London, 4 Stephenson Way, London NW1 2HE, UK
2 Institute of Evolutionary Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, West Mains Rd, Edinburgh EH9 3JT, UK
* Author for correspondence (g.hurst@ucl.ac.uk).
8 2 2007 
7 8 2005 
27 3 2007 
272 1572 1525 1534
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) has been a marker of choice for reconstructing historical patterns of population demography, admixture, biogeography and speciation. However, it has recently been suggested that the pervasive nature of direct and indirect selection on this molecule renders any conclusion derived from it ambiguous. We review here the evidence for indirect selection on mtDNA in arthropods arising from linkage disequilibrium with maternally inherited symbionts. We note first that these symbionts are very common in arthropods and then review studies that reveal the extent to which they shape mtDNA evolution. mtDNA diversity patterns are compatible with neutral expectations for an uninfected population in only 2 of 19 cases. The remaining 17 studies revealed cases of symbiont-driven reduction in mtDNA diversity, symbiont-driven increases in diversity, symbiont-driven changes in mtDNA variation over space and symbiont-associated paraphyly of mtDNA. We therefore conclude that these elements often confound the inference of an organism's evolutionary history from mtDNA data and that mtDNA on its own is an unsuitable marker for the study of recent historical events in arthropods. We also discuss the impact of these studies on the current programme of taxonomy based on DNA bar-coding.

mtDNAphylogeography
          Wolbachia
        symbiontpopulation geneticsselective sweep
   1. INTRODUCTION
The study of evolution frequently requires understanding the history of the population, species or clade under study. In population genetics, a recent history of population bottlenecks may restrict genetic variation and thus constrain the speed of adaptation. In examining diversification over space, we need to have detailed knowledge of the different populations' histories of colonization and the gene flow between them. In comparative analyses of processes of adaptation or molecular evolution, and in studies of historical biogeography, we require resolution of the relationships between species.

Ascertainment of these patterns relies extensively on genetic markers. The most widely used of these in animals has been variation in the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequence. This choice was well reasoned. mtDNA can be easily amplified from a variety of taxa and, because it is haploid, the sequence can be obtained without cloning. Because it has a high evolutionary rate and an effective population size approximately one-quarter that of nuclear markers, it allows a chance of recovering the pattern and tempo of recent historical events without an extensive sequencing effort. Thirdly, as an area of at least low recombination, the whole molecule can be assumed to have the same genealogical history. In contrast, while stringent efforts have been made to develop and amplify nuclear markers, this often involves the refinement of primers for the target species, the sampling of several genes before one with an appropriate evolutionary rate is discovered and the separation of alleles from heterozygous individuals via cloning before sequencing. While these problems can be overcome outside ‘model’ taxa where genomic sequence data are available, they increase the effort needed to gain the required information.

Mitochondrial DNA has therefore remained the marker of choice in many population, biogeographic and phylogenetic studies. Its use has also been recommended in taxonomic studies, with the proposal that all described species are given an mtDNA sequence tag or bar-code (Hebert et al. 2003). Indeed, the use of mtDNA differentiation in defining taxonomic units has been suggested. While mtDNA is a very useful marker, its use is not without complication. It was recognized at the outset that mtDNA was strictly a marker for historical processes in females; should male and female history differ in a species, then this marker would not reflect the history of the species as a whole but that of the female portion. Further, there have been technical issues arising from the presence of nuclear integrations of mtDNA sequence. mtDNA integrated into the nuclear genome may still amplify with conserved primers aimed at mitochondrial copies, complicating or confounding analysis (Bensasson et al. 2001).

Further to these known problems, Ballard &amp; Whitlock (2004) have recently argued that mtDNA evolution is non-neutral with sufficient regularity to question its utility as a marker for genomic history. Direct selection (selection on mtDNA itself) and indirect selection (selection arising from disequilibrium with other maternally transmitted genes) is sufficiently common to make inferences from mtDNA data unreliable. In this review, we examine evidence for indirect selection on mtDNA in arthropods arising from disequilibrium with vertically transmitted micro-organisms, and assess the potential of this linkage to confound an interpretation of the history of a population or species.

We first note that inherited symbionts are very common in invertebrates and can have profound effects on their host. We then present theory and data that suggest that the disequilibrium of symbionts with mtDNA can confound analysis of population, biogeographic and clade history. For ease of reference, these studies are summarized in table 1. Finally, we note that widespread symbiont incidence and diversity, combined with rapid turnover, means that their presence cannot be simply tested and controlled against. We therefore conclude that mtDNA is inappropriate as a sole marker in studies of the recent history of arthropods and, potentially, other invertebrates.

2. THE INCIDENCE OF INHERITED SYMBIONTS IN ARTHROPODS
It has long been recognized that many arthropods carry passenger micro-organisms: microbes that exist inside the cells of their host and pass from a female to her progeny through the egg. These micro-organisms can broadly be classified into two kinds: beneficial to the host and parasitic. In the case of the former, treatment of the arthropod host with antibiotics produces a decrease in host fitness (and commonly infertility or death). In the case of the latter, the drive that produces the spread of the micro-organism is frequently the manipulation of host reproduction towards the survival of infected females and the daughters of infected females.

Beneficial symbionts are found widely in arthropods and other invertebrates. The majority of aphid species, for instance, depend on the presence of the bacterium Buchnera to be able to synthesize essential amino acids. Cockroaches, termites and a variety of Hemiptera (e.g. white fly), Diptera (e.g. tsetse fly), Hymenoptera (e.g. carpenter ants) and Coleoptera (e.g. weevils) likewise rely on beneficial symbionts. Feeding on depauperate diet (blood throughout life; phloem; nitrogen-poor wood) are strong predisposing factors for the occurrence of these beneficial micro-organisms. The associations between beneficial symbionts and their host can be very long, as indicated by cocladogenesis of symbiont and host (e.g. Bandi et al. 1998). The observation that they have genomes that have shrunk massively over the course of symbiosis indicates that these beneficial symbionts undergo repeated selective sweeps associated with genomic rearrangements during the early parts of their association with the host (Wernegreen 2002).

Parasitic passenger micro-organisms are found even more widely. These micro-organisms show a variety of phenotypes associated with promoting the production and survival of infected daughters (which can transmit the maternally transmitted micro-organism) via negative effects on the production and survival of infected males and uninfected females (which cannot). In the simplest case, this involves creating a female bias in the host sex ratio. This is represented by cases of parthenogenesis induction in haplodiploid species and feminization in Crustacea. In a twist to this manipulation, killing of male hosts during embryogenesis is common in insects. Here, the advantage derives from removing any negative effects that male hosts may have on their sisters. Examples are found in Hemiptera, Hymenoptera, Diptera, Coleoptera and Lepidoptera. Even in Drosophila, which for ecological reasons are not the most likely to bear male-killers, there are 14 records of male-killing bacteria, indicating these parasites are widely present (Hurst &amp; Majerus 1993). The incidence is certainly higher in other species, such as the coccinellid beetles.

The most commonly observed form of parasitism is cytoplasmic incompatibility, which differs subtly in logic from sex ratio distortion. In this manipulation, zygotes formed following fertilization of an uninfected egg with sperm from an infected male die during early embryogenesis. This behaviour produces the spread of the infection in structured populations, as the bacterial phenotype is essentially one of selectively killing uninfected individuals. Cytoplasmic incompatibility has been described in insects, mites and crustaceans, and is probably very common (although cryptic, as frequently all individuals within a population are infected; Stouthamer et al. 1999). Two micro-organisms, Wolbachia and Cardinium, are known to induce it (Breeuwer et al. 1992; Hunter et al. 2003).

In total, these parasitic interactions are common. In large surveys, repeatable over geographical regions and across arthropod groups, Wolbachia alone infects in excess of 20% of insect species at any point in time (Werren et al. 1995; Werren &amp; Windsor 2000; Jiggins et al. 2001) and, in a limited survey, just over 50% of spiders (Rowley et al. 2004). The bacterium Cardinium infects around 7% of arthropods (Weeks et al. 2003).

The interactions between parasitic symbionts and their hosts are relatively short-lived in comparison to beneficial symbioses. While cocladogenesis of host and Wolbachia is sometimes observed (e.g. Marshall 2004), studies on focused host clades have indicated it is rather rare (Shoemaker et al. 2002). The mean lifespan of any particular interaction is therefore generally less than the mean time to speciation. This conclusion is reinforced by the observation of three actively spreading Wolbachia infections in natural populations (Turelli &amp; Hoffmann 1991; Hoshizaki &amp; Shimada 1995; Riegler &amp; Stauffer 2002). Thus, we can conclude that the 20% incidence reflects a pattern where new infections must arise relatively commonly. As a final complicating feature, it should be noted that a single population may be infected with more than one strain or species of parasitic inherited micro-organism and that different populations may show different infection statuses.

Finally, recent study has revealed the widespread presence of ‘secondary symbionts’. These are vertically transmitted micro-organisms that are not essential but appear to be locally beneficial (e.g. enhancing resistance to parasitoids and pathogens or adaptation to growth on a particular species of host plant; Oliver et al. 2003; Ferrari et al. 2004; Tsuchida et al. 2004). These can be common and it is known that their frequency varies geographically (Tsuchida et al. 2002). What is uncertain is the extent of disequilibrium with mtDNA, which will be inversely related to the rate of these symbionts' horizontal transmission in the field.

3. PASSENGER MICRO-ORGANISMS AND THE POPULATION GENETICS OF mtDNA
Inherited micro-organisms will influence the population genetics of the host's mtDNA if they are cotransmitted and therefore in linkage disequilibrium. However, linkage disequilibrium will break down if either the symbiont or mitochondria are paternally or horizontally (infectiously) transmitted with sufficient frequency (Turelli et al. 1992). This process is equivalent to recombination breaking down the linkage between nuclear genes. Horizontal or paternal transmission of both symbionts and mtDNA has been documented in insects. Despite this, symbionts in natural populations are typically found in linkage disequilibrium with mtDNA (table 1), suggesting that such transmission is so infrequent as to be unimportant. For example, paternal transmission of both Wolbachia and mtDNA have been recorded in laboratory populations of Drosophila simulans but it is sufficiently rare that they remain in linkage disequilibrium in the field (Hoffmann &amp; Turelli 1988; Kondo et al. 1990; Turelli et al. 1992). However, there are some species where infectious transmission of symbionts is so common that there is unlikely to be any association between the microbe and host mtDNA (Huigens et al. 2000).

Provided the assumption of linkage disequilibrium is met, if a population becomes infected with a symbiont that has sufficient drive to spread, the mtDNA type associated with the initial infection will hitchhike through the population (‘indirect selection’ on the mtDNA). This process has been recreated in laboratory populations of the mosquito Aedes albopictus infected with a Wolbachia strain that induces cytoplasmic incompatibility (Kambhampati et al. 1992). The most remarkable example, however, comes from Californian populations of D. simulans. These were originally uninfected, but during the 1980s they were invaded by a Wolbachia strain that induced cytoplasmic incompatibility (Turelli &amp; Hoffmann 1991). This infection rapidly spread to a high prevalence and carried with it a mtDNA haplotype that was previously rare or absent in uninfected Californian populations (Turelli et al. 1992). Once the infection neared fixation, the original mtDNA haplotype was completely replaced by the haplotype linked to the symbiont. The sweeps of mtDNA seen in California D. simulans are probably regular events in insects. Despite being transient events, the spread of a new Wolbachia strain over space has also been documented in the delphacid bug Laodelphax striatellus and the fly Rhagoletis cerasi (Hoshizaki &amp; Shimada 1995; Riegler &amp; Stauffer 2002). These observations, together with the lack of cocladogenesis between hosts and symbionts discussed above, indicate that new interactions (which must involve symbiont spread) occur during the lifespan of many species.

It is clear from these studies that mtDNA within a population is affected by symbiont spread. Further, the ability of symbionts to spread between populations by occasional movement of hosts, and the ability of different host populations to maintain different symbiont strains, can also confound interpretation attempts to reconstruct the phylogeography of a species. The drive associated with symbiont manipulation can even result in the spread of the symbiont into a new species following an occasional hybridization event. This will homogenize the mtDNA of different species. We now review the effects that symbionts may have on patterns within populations, between populations and between species variation in mtDNA.

4. THE EFFECT OF SYMBIONTS ON mtDNA DIVERSITY WITHIN POPULATIONS
If a population is infected by one or more symbionts, then patterns of mitochondrial polymorphism will be altered by natural selection acting on those symbionts. Depending on the recency of invasion and the number of symbionts present, they may either reduce or increase diversity. There can also be an alteration in the frequency distribution of haplotypes within the population (table 1). Unfortunately, it is these parameters that are used to infer the historical demography of populations and it is difficult to distinguish demographic from symbiont-induced effects.

The initial selective sweep that occurs as the symbiont invades, and subsequent sweeps of advantageous symbiont mutations, will reduce mtDNA diversity and skew the frequency distribution of alleles towards rare variants (Maynard-Smith &amp; Haigh 1974; Tajima 1989b). These are similar patterns to those produced by population bottlenecks and expansions, and a selective sweep could thus easily be mistaken for these demographic processes (Tajima 1989a). Therefore, low mtDNA diversity alone should not be taken as evidence for a bottleneck or founder event, although this may sometimes be the case (see Rokas et al. (2001) for a genuine example). Instead, it is likely that many cases of low mtDNA variation are not caused by demographic events but selective sweeps of symbionts running through the population.

This is supported by the observation that parasitic symbionts are commonly associated with low mitochondrial diversity (seven cases in table 1). In at least two of these species, it has been shown that this has been caused by a selective sweep rather than a population bottleneck (Ballard &amp; Kreitman 1994; Ballard 2000a; Jiggins 2003). These studies used an HKA test (Hudson et al. 1987) to show that the genetic diversity of mitochondrial genes was significantly less than their nuclear counterparts. This suggests that the low mtDNA diversity is caused by the symbiont, as demographic processes would have reduced the diversity of the entire genome.

These mitochondrial selective sweeps could result from selection on any maternally transmitted element, including the mitochondria themselves, symbionts or, in female heterogametic hosts, the W sex chromosome. Confirmation that selection is acting on the symbiont has come from comparisons of infected and uninfected hosts from the same population, from different populations or from different species. For example, uninfected Acraea encedon butterflies have more diverse mitochondria than Wolbachia infected individuals from the same population (Jiggins 2003). In a study that compared different populations of D. simulans, an uninfected population in East Africa was found to have greater mtDNA diversity than infected populations from elsewhere (Dean et al. 2003). Finally, Wolbachia-infected species have been found to harbour lower levels of mtDNA diversity than closely related uninfected species (Shoemaker et al. 1999, 2004).

The effect of a selective sweep on mtDNA diversity will in part depend on the time that has elapsed since it occurred, with diversity gradually increasing after a selective sweep. Therefore, these effects may be most important for parasitic symbionts, as these tend to have short-lived associations with their hosts and frequently transmit to new host species (Werren et al. 1995).

If a symbiont is imperfectly transmitted between generations, then any uninfected offspring produced by infected females will carry the mitochondrial haplotype associated with the infection. Because this process is unidirectional, the original mtDNA lineages in the uninfected hosts will ultimately be lost and replaced by the mtDNA type associated with the symbiont (Turelli et al. 1992; Johnstone &amp; Hurst 1996). Therefore, the selective sweep may affect uninfected, as well as infected, hosts. However, whether this occurs will depend on the time that has elapsed since the symbiont invaded and the transmission rate of the symbiont from mother to offspring (Turelli et al. 1992; Johnstone &amp; Hurst 1996). This is illustrated by two closely related species of butterfly, Acraea encedana and A. encedon, which are infected by male-killing Wolbachia. The infection in the former species is older and has a lower transmission rate than the latter species. As expected, the selective sweep has eliminated mtDNA variation from both infected and uninfected individuals of A. encedana but has only affected infected females of A. encedon (Jiggins 2003).

So far we have only considered the simplest scenario in which a single symbiont invades an uninfected population. It is also common to find multiple strains of cytoplasmic incompatibility inducing Wolbachia co-infecting the same individuals. In this situation, the effects on mtDNA will be qualitatively similar to a single infection. However, some symbionts are polymorphic, with different infections occurring in different individuals but never co-infecting the same host. In the five cases where this has been examined, the different symbionts are associated with different mtDNA sequences (James &amp; Ballard 2000; Schulenburg et al. 2002; Baudry et al. 2003; Jiggins 2003). Therefore, although a selective sweep may reduce the diversity of mtDNA associated with any one symbiont, high levels of diversity may be maintained within the population as a whole across different infection classes and the diversity of a population will depend on the number of symbionts it harbours. This can result in a mitochondrial genealogy with deep internal branches and short terminal branches, which could easily be mistaken as evidence for population structure and admixture (F. Jiggins, unpublished results).

Once a symbiont has invaded and reached equilibrium, the associated mtDNA will gradually accumulate mutations, and patterns of polymorphism may eventually resemble those expected under neutrality (e.g. Keller et al. 2004; Marshall 2004). However, it is notable that there are only two case studies from 19 in which mtDNA diversity in symbiont-infected species was compatible with that expected in the comparable uninfected species. There are several reasons why diversity may not return to ‘normal’. The first is that mutations may occur that increase the symbiont's fitness and are fixed by positive selection, resulting in recurrent selective sweeps through the population. Evidence for this process comes from a strong positive selection found to act on certain symbiont genes (Jiggins et al. 2002), which contrasts with mitochondrial genes that tend to be under a purifying selection. This process may be particularly important in parasitic interactions, where host–parasite coevolution can result in strong directional selection (Jiggins et al. 2002). However, if an advantageous mutation occurs in a beneficial symbiont, it may also cause a selective sweep of mtDNA. That this may be a regular occurrence is suggested by the observation that genome reduction of beneficial symbionts is common during the early stages of symbiosis and must be associated with selective sweeps within the population.

The second reason that diversity may fail to return to pre-infection levels is that the effective population size of mtDNA is lower after infection. There are two causes of this. First, in cases where there is inefficient transmission, only mutations in infected individuals can spread. Thus, the effective population size diminishes to that of the number of infected females (Johnstone &amp; Hurst 1996). In cases of low prevalence infection, as found for many male-killers, significant reduction in diversity at equilibrium is therefore expected. The reduced variation in mtDNA relative to nuclear DNA in D. innubila, compared with the same metric in D. falleni, an uninfected sibling species, can be explained by a model based on the reduced effective population size of mtDNA associated with a prevalence of infection in this species of 35% (Dyer &amp; Jaenike 2004). The second cause of diminished effective population size is greater efficacy of background selection in the presence of a symbiont. Background selection can be understood as a reduction in the mitochondrial effective population size to the proportion of cytoplasms free from deleterious mutations (Charlesworth et al. 1993). Its impact on mtDNA diversity will be greatest when the deleterious mutation rate is highest. Considering the relative mutation rates and genome sizes of symbionts and mtDNA (Tamura 1992; Ochman et al. 1999; Sun et al. 2001; Wernegreen 2002), the total cytoplasmic mutation rate will be increased roughly tenfold in symbiont-infected hosts. However, it is unclear whether mitochondrial and symbiont mutations will have similar effects on fitness, nor whether mtDNA lies in a region of parameter space where background selection is important.

5. PHYLOGEOGRAPHIC IMPACTS: BETWEEN POPULATION EFFECTS OF PASSENGER MICRO-ORGANISMS
There are two potential effects of passenger micro-organisms on mtDNA structure between populations. The first is that the migration of an infected individual from one population into an uninfected one can produce a sweep of the infection and associated mtDNA haplotype through the population. This will homogenize the haplotypes of the two populations. This, of course, happens without homogenization of nuclear genes, but if only the mtDNA is studied the populations appear to be fully mictic and unstructured. As discussed above, selective sweeps of symbionts are probably common events.

The second effect is that mtDNA differentiation between populations may be increased due to heterogeneity of the infections between populations. This could occur if natural selection maintains different symbionts in different populations despite migration between them. Alternatively, if a selective sweep occurs in one population but not another, then this could also inflate measures of population differentiation.

Drosophila simulans provides examples of both of these phenomena. As discussed previously, the spread of Wolbachia strain wRi through California was accompanied by a sweep of the mtDNA, homogenizing the haplotype of the Californian population to that of the strain from which the invading fly derived. Geographical variation in the infecting strain present is also known to maintain mtDNA differentiation between populations of D. simulans, with each infection producing a different ‘compatibility type’ (they do not rescue each other's zygotic death phenotype). Different strains of infection have different associated mtDNA haplotypes (and populations of different infection status differ in mtDNA haplotypes) and appear isolated (James &amp; Ballard 2000). However, examination of nuclear markers indicates they are not isolated with respect to nuclear genes; these still flow between populations (Ballard et al. 2002). This situation is also observed for the blowfly Protocalliphora in the USA, where different populations bear different strains of Wolbachia and different mtDNA types, but these patterns do not reflect the population history inferred from nuclear markers (Baudry et al. 2003).

The geographical structuring of mtDNA associated with different infections can also be seen for different infections with male-killing bacteria. The two-spot lady-bird, Adalia bipunctata, bears three different male-killing infections within Europe (Hurst et al. 1999a,b). The frequency of these infections varies geographically, with one of the infections found all over Europe and the other two with more restrictive incidence. Analysis of mtDNA diversity across Europe indicates that diversity can be accounted for by variation in infection status. Geography did not explain any of the variation when infection status was controlled (Schulenburg et al. 2002). Structuring associated with different symbiont strains over space is also seen in Acraea encedon (Jiggins 2003).

6. EFFECTS ON THE mtDNA PHYLOGENY OF RECENTLY DIVERGED SPECIES
At first sight, passenger micro-organisms are expected to affect the dynamics of mtDNA within populations but not the branching pattern of mtDNA on a phylogeny. However, two case studies indicate this is not necessarily the case. First, there is the A. encedon and A. encedana species pair. These both bear a male-killing Wolbachia infection, and evidence from the Wolbachia sequence indicates they are very closely related strains (note that A. encedon also has a second, more distantly related, infection). When the phylogeny of individuals of the different species is constructed based on mtDNA, A. encedon and A. encedana individuals that bear the same Wolbachia infection bear identical mtDNA sequences, distinct from that found in uninfected A. encedon individuals. While the species clearly are distinct on morphological grounds, on the grounds of nuclear DNA sequences and in terms of genetic isolation, they appear identical on the basis of the mtDNA sequences of the infected individuals.

The most likely explanation for this is that rare hybridization events, although producing very little in the way of flow of nuclear genes, can produce the transfer of the male-killer and associated mitotype from species to species. This male-killer has a drive mechanism that results in its increasing in frequency, despite initially being in poorly adapted hybrid individuals, and the infection and associated mitotype spreads into the new species.

This transfer and fixation of mtDNA following hybridization would appear at first sight to be a rare event. However, it has also been observed in Drosophila. In Drosophila, mtDNA has introgressed between D. simulans and D. mauritiana, associated with Wolbachia infection (Rousset &amp; Solignac 1995; Ballard 2000b). Anecdotally, three out of four cases we have studied in our laboratories have shown evidence of symbiont-induced mtDNA introgression confounding phylogenetic estimation from an mtDNA sequence.

It is possible that symbiont-driven introgression may explain some recent case studies where mtDNA phylogenies conflict with those obtained from nuclear DNA. Shaw (2002), for instance, observes that while certain crickets of the genus Laupala in Hawaii do not differ in mtDNA sequence, they do exhibit substantial differentiation at nuclear loci. This incongruence points to selection causing introgression of the mtDNA following hybridization. A good hypothesis for this observation is that hybridization carries novel symbiont infections. The spread of the introgressed symbiont would then be associated with the spread of introgressed mtDNA, homogenizing mtDNA variation across the species boundary despite a high genetic integrity of the species as recorded on nuclear markers.

7. CONCLUSIONS
Indirect selection on mtDNA arising from disequilibrium with inherited micro-organisms is very common in arthropods and is probably widespread in many other invertebrates. While we have documented cases associated with parasitic-inherited micro-organisms, it is known that required beneficial micro-organisms are also in linkage disequilibrium with mtDNA (Funk et al. 2000; Hurtado et al. 2003). This will also produce selective sweeps as advantageous symbiont mutations spread through the population, particularly in recently evolved interactions. It is also possible that disequilibrium with secondary symbionts (beneficial symbionts that are not required: see §2) will likewise produce sweeps and additionally produce geographical structures in host mtDNA.

These associations will all confound simple interpretations of genomic history from mtDNA data. A brief description of classical explanations for patterns of mtDNA diversity, along with potential explanations for the pattern based on indirect selection associated with symbiosis, is given in table 2. It is our conclusion that the interactions occur commonly enough that the presence of these symbionts makes it both unsafe and unsatisfactory to infer patterns of genome history based on mtDNA sequence data. As a preliminary judgment, therefore, we would regard the development and use of microsatellites for intraspecific study, and nuclear coding genes for phylogenetic study, a requirement to reveal the history of nuclear DNA. This judgment is preliminary because a full test of this issue requires testing the congruence of mtDNA and nuclear DNA patterns of variability across a range of clades, where symbiont presence has not been ascertained and not (as in our reviewed studies) been used as a proband to seek the effects. We do, however, regard the above studies combined with the known high incidence of Wolbachia as an evidential ‘smoking gun’ that urges precaution in the first instant, pending formal testing.

One recent and contentious use of mtDNA sequence is in DNA bar-coding (Hebert et al. 2003; 2004a). In DNA bar-coding, the sequence of the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase subunit 1 (COI) gene is used for the purpose of taxonomic identification and assessment of biodiversity, with the philosophy that for each species there is one bar-code (and reciprocally, one bar-code indicates a given species). DNA bar-coding relies on there being low levels of mtDNA variation within a species compared with differentiation between species and monophyly of mtDNA within species. While there may generally be low mtDNA diversity within a species, and species may frequently be delineable by mtDNA, the case studies above make it clear that symbionts can disrupt this pattern. They can homogenize biological species for mtDNA following introgression of symbionts, as in Acraea and Drosophila (cases of one bar-code, two species). They may also make one species appear as two on the basis of high levels of intraspecific variation in a mtDNA sequence associated with possession of different symbiont strains, as in Adalia (cases of two bar-codes, one species).

While it is sure from the above and other studies that bar-coding will create some mistakes, what is unsure is the frequency of mistakes and whether this frequency exceeds tolerance limits. While a review of species polyphyly on the basis of mtDNA suggested 23% of species may not be monophyletic for mtDNA sequences (Funk &amp; Omland 2003), bar-coding tests have not revealed this pattern (Hebert et al. 2003; 2004a). However, with notable exceptions (Hebert et al., 2004b), past tests have tended not to explicitly test the ability to discriminate a range of closely related sibling species but rather a range of congenerics, many of which are relatively distantly related. Further, the sample size used when testing intraspecific variation has often been limited, with one or two extra individuals within known species obtained and found to possess very similar COI sequences to those previously found. Indeed, where they have been found to carry divergent sequences, the inference has been made that the process has revealed cryptic species, rather than that mtDNA can act as a poor marker.

Thus, while bar-coding clearly has utility for placing unknown specimens in the genera in which they belong, its utility at the species level is much less certain. The potential limitations of DNA bar-coding are well illustrated by the insect group for which we have the most detailed understanding of both taxonomy and genetic diversity, the melanogaster subgroup of Drosophila. Of the nine species in this subgroup, only three have unique bar-codes. It is likely that five of the six cases where bar-coding fails are due to the presence of Wolbachia (table 1). Again, this evidence requires full evaluation across an array of clades where infection status is not a proband for the study.

Beyond the specific question of bar-coding, can we rescue the use of mtDNA as a marker? In some studies, authors have tested for and excluded the presence of Wolbachia in a particular species and thus inferred low mtDNA diversity to indicate evidence of a bottleneck (e.g. Johnson et al. 2004). However, this approach is not completely safe. Notwithstanding the possibility of direct selection on mtDNA, Wolbachia is one of many symbionts. Cardinium, for instance, infects approximately 7% of arthropods (Weeks et al. 2003). Aside from these, bacteria from many different major divisions can be found in arthropods (e.g. Hurst et al. 1999a), as can vertically transmitted microsporidia (Terry et al. 2004). Many vertically transmitted bacteria have closely related free-living forms and many remain to be discovered. Thus, polymerase chain reaction assays for the presence or absence of all symbionts are simply not possible and only a microscopy-based screen on the dissected ovaries of 100 individuals could really provide evidence that symbionts were absent. In addition to this, it is possible to find a false negative for symbiont presence if sampling is not sufficiently intensive, because symbionts are sometimes only present in a minority of individuals unless sampling is intensive (e.g. Jiggins et al. 2001). Finally, current absence (if it could be proven) is no assurance of past absence. The lack of cocladogenesis of Wolbachia and their hosts indicates that interactions are relatively short-lived in evolutionary time (Shoemaker et al. 2002). Low mtDNA diversity could be caused by a symbiont that has subsequently died out within the species.

A more promising approach is to test mtDNA datasets for the signature of natural selection that will be left by the spread of symbionts. Unfortunately, this is not simple because the demographic processes of interest will often produce similar patterns to selection acting on symbionts (Tajima 1989a). This problem can only be reliably overcome by corroborating the inferences made using mtDNA with data from nuclear genes (Rokas et al. 2001).

We therefore conclude that mtDNA alone cannot be used to reliably infer population history or the history of closely related species in arthropods as there is a very high probability of an incorrect conclusion due to indirect selection arising from the presence of a symbiont. Reciprocally, it is also problematic to infer symbiont history from mtDNA alone. We argue that mtDNA should never be used as a sole marker in studies of either genomic or symbiont history. While our arguments above derive from studies of arthropods, we would caution that these arguments may apply in a wider range of species. There are several records of inherited bacteria being present in nematodes (Adams &amp; Eichenmuller 1963; Marti et al. 1995; Sironi et al. 1995) and also records of inherited bacteria in disequilibrium with mtDNA in molluscs (Hurtado et al. 2003). It should not be assumed that taxa lack symbionts until careful surveys have been carried out because recent history indicates that even well studied groups (e.g. filarial nematodes) can in fact be covertly infected with inherited symbionts (Sironi et al. 1995).

We wish to thank Jim Mallet for encouragement to write this piece and for comments. GH wishes to acknowledge support from the BBSRC and NERC. FJ wishes to acknowledge support from the Wellcome Trust.

Tables
Table 1 Known effects of symbionts on mtDNA variation.

host	symbiont	observation	references	
Porcellionides pruinosus
 (Crustacea: Isopoda)	Wolbachia (probably feminizing)	infected and uninfected woodlice from southern populations
 have divergent mtDNA sequences	
                Marcade et al. (1999)
              	
Armadillidium vulgare
 (Crustacea: Isopoda)	feminizing Wolbachia	Wolbachia associated with a subset of mitotypes in the
 population	Grandjean et al. (1993), Rigaud et al. (1999)	
Gammarus duebeni
 (Crustacea: Amphipoda)	feminizing microsporidia	association between infecting feminizer species and mtDNA
 haplotypes	
                Ironside et al. (2003)
              	
Adalia bipunctata (Coleoptera)	male-killing Spiroplasma, Rickettsia
 and Wolbachia	frequency of mtDNA haplotypes associated with the bacteria
 in the population, not geography	Schulenburg et al. (2002))	
Chelymorpha alternans (Coleoptera)	
                Wolbachia
              	mtDNA diversity not different from neutrality	
                Keller et al. (2004)
              	
Acraea encedana (Lepidoptera)	male-killing Wolbachia	a selective sweep has significantly reduced mtDNA diversity
 in infected and uninfected butterflies	
                Jiggins (2003)
              	
Acraea encedon (Lepidoptera)	male-killing Wolbachia	reduced mtDNA diversity in infected but not uninfected
 butterflies. Two strains of Wolbachia associated
 with different mtDNA haplotypes. Geographical
 structure in uninfected, but not infected, mtDNA.
 mtDNA has introgressed with Wolbachia from
 A. encedana	
                Jiggins (2003)
              	
Ostrinia furnacalis (Lepidoptera)	male-killing Wolbachia	mtDNA sequences in infected and uninfected moths are
 paraphyletic	F. Jiggins, unpublished data	
Orseolia oryzae (Diptera)	Wolbachia (effect on host unknown)	three highly diverged mitotypes. One is maternally
 inherited and associated with Wolbachia. The other
 two are paternally inherited and found in uninfected
 males	
                Behura et al. (2001)
              	
Drosophila recens (Diptera)	cytoplasmic incompatibility Wolbachia	lower mtDNA diversity but similar nuclear DNA diversity
 compared with related uninfected species. Elevated rate
 of substitution	Shoemaker et al. (1999, 2004)	
Drosophila innubila (Diptera)	male-killing Wolbachia	lower mtDNA diversity compared with nuclear DNA associ-
ated with an ancient infection. mtDNA diversity is as
 expected from neutral models with reduced Ne of
 mtDNA associated with infection	
                Dyer &amp; Jaenike (2004)
              	
Drosophila santomea, D. yakuba
 and D. teissieri (Diptera)	Wolbachia (effect on host unknown)	these species have very similar mtDNA and Wolbachia,
 but have diverged in nuclear DNA. Probably introgression of
 mtDNA and Wolbachia between species	Monnerot et al. (1990), Lachaise et al. (2000)	
Drosophila mauritiana (Diptera)	Wolbachia (effect on host unknown)	two paraphyletic mitotypes. One has introgressed together
 with Wolbachia infection from D. simulans	Rousset &amp; Solignac (1995), Ballard (2000b)	
Drosophila simulans (Diptera)	cytoplasmic incompatibility Wolbachia	selective sweep has significantly reduced mtDNA nucleotide
 diversity in infected populations versus uninfected. Geo-
graphical structure determined by symbiont strain present,
 not population history	Ballard &amp; Kreitman (1994), Ballard et al. (1996), Ballard (2000a), Dean et al. (2003)	
Aedes albopictus (Diptera)	cytoplasmic incompatibility Wolbachia	low mtDNA diversity relative to nuclear DNA. mtDNA
 observed hitchhiking with Wolbachia in laboratory cages	Kambhampati et al. (1992), Birungi &amp; Munstermann (2002), Armbruster et al. (2003))	
Protocalliphora sialia (Diptera)	Wolbachia (effect on host unknown)	infected hosts have less diverse mtDNA than uninfected
 hosts. Evidence of a selective sweep and linkage
 disequilibrium between bacterial strains and mtDNA.
 Geographical structure determined by symbiont strain
 present, not population history	
                Baudry et al. (2003)
              	
Formica execta (Hymenoptera)	Wolbachia (effect on host unknown)	ants infected with Wolbachia strain wFex1 have a different
 mtDNA haplotype from those lacking it	
                Reuter &amp; Keller (2003)
              	
Solenopsis invicta (Hymenoptera)	Wolbachia (effect on host unknown)	two paraphyletic mtDNA clades associated with different
 Wolbachia strains. No clear deviation from neutrality
 within clades, suggesting they are ancient. However,
 alternative hypotheses include two cryptic species	Shoemaker et al. (2000, 2003)	
Allonemobius (Orthoptera)	Wolbachia	mtDNA diversity not different from neutral expectations.
 Evidence of mtDNA haplotype–Wolbachia strain
 association	
                Marshall (2004)
              	
Table 2 Confounding influences of inherited symbionts on the interpretation of the history of a species from mtDNA.

observation	classical explanation	alternative	
low mtDNA diversity within population	bottleneck of species due to colonization
 or population size contraction	recent spread of a symbiont or new strain
 of existing symbiont	
high mtDNA diversity within population	large and old population	presence of more than one symbiont
 strain within population maintains
 diversity	
low mtDNA diversity between populations	exchange of genes on regular basis or
 recent isolation	symbiont-induced selective sweep
 through both populations, homogen-
izing mtDNA	
high mtDNA diversity between populations	historical isolation of populations	presence of different symbiont strains
 maintaining haplotype structure
 despite nuclear gene flow	
paraphyly of single species on mtDNA-based tree	true paraphyly or incorrect previous
 ascertainment of species status	transfer of symbiont via hybridization,
 followed by selective sweep. Good
 species, not paraphyletic	

   REFERENCES

          
            Adams RE 
            Eichenmuller JJ 
           
          A bacterial infection of Xiphenema americanum

          Phytopathology 
          1963 
          53 
          745 
        

          
            Armbruster P 
            Damsky WE 
            Giordano R 
            Birungi J 
            Munstermann LE 
            Conn JE 
           
          Infection of new- and old-world Aedes albopictus (Diptera: Culicidae) by the intracellular parasite Wolbachia: implications for host mitochondrial DNA evolution

          J Med Ent 
          2003 
          40 
          356 
          360

        

          
            Ballard JWO 
           
          Comparative genomics of mitochondrial DNA in Drosophila simulans

          J Mol Evol 
          2000a 
          51 
          64 
          75

          10903373 
        

          
            Ballard JWO 
           
          When one is not enough: introgression of mitochondrial DNA in Drosophila

          Mol Biol Evol 
          2000b 
          17 
          1126 
          1130

          10889226 
        

          
            Ballard JWO 
            Kreitman M 
           
          Unravelling selection in the mitochondrial genome of Drosophila

          Genetics 
          1994 
          138 
          757 
          772

          7851772 
        

          
            Ballard JWO 
            Whitlock MC 
           
          The incomplete natural history of mitochondria

          Mol Ecol 
          2004 
          13 
          729 
          744

          15012752 
        

          
            Ballard JWO 
            Hatzidakis J 
            Karr TL 
            Krietman M 
           
          Reduced variation in Drosophila simulans mitochondrial DNA

          Genetics 
          1996 
          144 
          1519 
          1528

          8978041 
        

          
            Ballard JWO 
            Chernoff B 
            James AC 
           
          Divergence of mitochondrial DNA is not corroborated by nuclear DNA, morphology, or behaviour in Drosophila simulans

          Evolution 
          2002 
          56 
          527 
          545

          11989683 
        

          
            Bandi C 
            Anderson TJC 
            Genchi C 
            Blaxter ML 
           
          Phylogeny of Wolbachia in filarial nematodes

          Proc R Soc B 
          1998 
          265 
          2407 
          2413

          (doi:10.1098/rspb.1998.0591.) 
        

          
            Baudry E 
            Bartos J 
            Emerson K 
            Whitworth T 
            Werren JH 
           
          Wolbachia and genetic variability in the birdnest blowfly Protocalliphora sialia

          Mol Ecol 
          2003 
          12 
          1843 
          1854

          12803636 
        

          
            Behura SK 
            Sahu SC 
            Mohan M 
            Nair S 
           
          Wolbachia in the Asian rice gall midge, Orseolia oryzae (Wood-Mason): correlation between host mitotypes and infection status

          Ins Mol Biol 
          2001 
          10 
          163 
          171

        

          
            Bensasson D 
            Zhang DX 
            Hartl DL 
            Hewitt GM 
           
          Mitochondrial pseudogenes: evolution's misplaced witnesses

          Trends Ecol Evol 
          2001 
          16 
          314 
          321

          11369110 
        

          
            Birungi J 
            Munstermann LE 
           
          Genetic structure of Aedes albopictus (Diptera: Culicidae) populations based on mitochondrial ND5 sequences: evidence for an independent invasion into Brazil and United States

          Ann Ent Soc Am 
          2002 
          95 
          125 
          132

        

          
            Breeuwer JAJ 
            Stouthamer R 
            Barns SM 
            Pelletier DA 
            Weisburg WG 
            Werren JH 
           
          Phylogeny of cytoplasmic incompatability micro-organisms in the parasitoid wasp Nasonia (Hymenoptera: Pteromalidae) based on 16S ribosomal DNA sequences

          Insect Mol Biol 
          1992 
          1 
          25 
          36

          1343772 
        

          
            Charlesworth B 
            Morgan MT 
            Charlesworth D 
           
          The effect of deleterious mutations on neutral genetic variation

          Genetics 
          1993 
          134 
          1289 
          1303

          8375663 
        

          
            Dean MD 
            Ballard KJ 
            Glass A 
            Ballard JWO 
           
          Influence of two Wolbachia strains on population structure of East African Drosophila simulans

          Genetics 
          2003 
          165 
          1959 
          1969

          14704179 
        

          
            Dyer KA 
            Jaenike JJ 
           
          Evolutionary stable infection by a male-killing endosymbiont in Drosophila innubila: molecular evidence from the host and parasite genomes

          Genetics 
          2004 
          168 
          1443 
          1455

          15579697 
        

          
            Ferrari J 
            Darby AC 
            Daniell TJ 
            Godfray HCJ 
            Douglas AE 
           
          Linking the bacterial community in pea aphids with host-plant use and natural enemy resistance

          Ecol Ent 
          2004 
          29 
          60 
          65

        

          
            Funk DJ 
            Omland KE 
           
          Species level paraphyly and polyphyly: frequency, causes, and consequences, with insights from animal mitochondrial DNA

          A Rev Ecol Evol Syst 
          2003 
          34 
          397 
          423

        

          
            Funk DJ 
            Helbling L 
            Wernegreen JJ 
            Moran NA 
           
          Intraspecific phylogenetic congruence among multiple symbiont genomes

          Proc R Soc B 
          2000 
          267 
          2517 
          2521

          (doi:10.1098/rspb.2000.1314.) 
        

          
            Grandjean F 
            Rigaud T 
            Raimond R 
            Juchault P 
            Souty-Grosset C 
           
          Mitochondrial DNA polymorphism and feminizing sex factors dynamics in a natural population of Armadillidium vulgare (Crustacea, Isopoda)

          Genetica 
          1993 
          92 
          55 
          60

          8163156 
        

          
            Hebert PDN 
            Cywinska A 
            Ball SL 
            DeWaard JR 
           
          Biological identifications through DNA barcodes

          Proc R Soc B 
          2003 
          270 
          313 
          321

          (doi:10.1098/rspb.2002. 2218.) 
        

          
            Hebert PDN 
            Stoeckle MY 
            Zemlak TS 
            Francis CM 
           
          Identification of birds through DNA barcodes

          PLoS Biol 
          2004a 
          2 
          1657 
          1663

        

          
            Hebert PDN 
            Penton EH 
            Burns JM 
            Janzen DH 
            Hallwachs W 
           
          Ten species in one: DNA barcoding reveals cryptic species in the neotropical skipper butterfly Astraptes fulgerator

          Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
          2004b 
          101 
          14 812 
          14 817

        

          
            Hoffmann AA 
            Turelli M 
           
          Unidirectional incompatibility in Drosophila simulans: inheritance, geographic variation and fitness effects

          Genetics 
          1988 
          119 
          435 
          444

          17246430 
        

          
            Hoshizaki S 
            Shimada T 
           
          PCR-based detection of Wolbachia, cytoplasmic microorganisms, infected in natural populations of Laodelphax striatellus (Homoptera: Delphacidae) in central Japan: has the distribution of Wolbachia spread recently?

          Insect Mol Biol 
          1995 
          4 
          237 
          243

          8825761 
        

          
            Hudson RR 
            Kreitman M 
            Aquade M 
           
          A test of neutral molecular evolution based on nucleotide data

          Genetics 
          1987 
          116 
          153 
          159

          3110004 
        

          
            Huigens ME 
            Luck RF 
            Klaassen RHG 
            Maas M 
            Timmermans M 
            Stouthamer R 
           
          Infectious parthenogenesis

          Nature 
          2000 
          405 
          178 
          179

          10821272 
        

          
            Hunter MS 
            Perlman SJ 
            Kelly SE 
           
          A bacterial symbiont in the Bacteroidetes induces cytoplasmic incompatibility in the parasitoid wasp Encarsia pergandiella

          Proc R Soc B 
          2003 
          270 
          2185 
          2190

          (doi:10.1098/rspb.2003.2475.) 
        

          
            Hurst GDD 
            Majerus MEN 
           
          Why do maternally inherited microorganisms kill males?

          Heredity 
          1993 
          71 
          81 
          95

        

          
            Hurst GDD 
            Schulenburg J. H. G. v. d. 
            Majerus TMO 
            Bertrand D 
            Zakharov IA 
            Baungaard J 
            Volkl W 
            Stouthamer R 
            Majerus MEN 
           
          Invasion of one insect species, Adalia bipunctata, by two different male-killing bacteria

          Insect Mol Biol 
          1999 
          8 
          133 
          139

          9927182 
        

          
            Hurst GDD 
            
           
          Male-killing Wolbachia in two species of insect

          Proc R Soc B 
          1999 
          266 
          735 
          740

          (doi:10. 1098/rspb.1999.0698.) 
        

          
            Hurtado LA 
            Mateos M 
            Lutz RA 
            Vrijenhoek RC 
           
          Coupling of bacterial endosymbiont and host mitochondrial genomes in the hydrothermal vent clam Calyptogena magnifica

          Appl Environ Microbiol 
          2003 
          69 
          2058 
          2064

          12676683 
        

          
            Ironside JE 
            Dunn AM 
            Rollinson D 
            Smith JE 
           
          Association with host mitochondrial haplotypes suggests that feminizing microsporidia lack horizontal transmission

          J Evol Biol 
          2003 
          16 
          1077 
          1083

          14640399 
        

          
            James AC 
            Ballard JWO 
           
          Expression of cytoplasmic incompatibility in Drosophila simulans and its impact on infection frequencies and distribution of Wolbachia pipientis

          Evolution 
          2000 
          54 
          1661 
          1672

          11108593 
        

          
            Jiggins FM 
           
          Male-killing Wolbachia and mitochondrial DNA: selective sweeps, hybrid introgression and parasite population dynamics

          Genetics 
          2003 
          164 
          5 
          12

          12750316 
        

          
            Jiggins FM 
            Bentley JK 
            Majerus MEN 
            Hurst GDD 
           
          How many species are infected with Wolbachia? Cryptic sex ratio distorters revealed to be common by intensive sampling

          Proc R Soc B 
          2001 
          268 
          1123 
          1126

          (doi:10.1098/rspb.2001.1632.) 
        

          
            Jiggins FM 
            Hurst GDD 
            Yang Z 
           
          Host-symbiont conflicts: positive selection on the outer membrane protein of parasitic but not mutualistic Rickettsiaceae

          Mol Biol Evol 
          2002 
          19 
          1341 
          1349

          12140246 
        

          
            Johnson AJ 
            Schemerhorn BJ 
            Shukle RH 
           
          A first assessment of mitochondrial DNA variation and geographic distribution of haplotypes in Hessian fly (Diptera: Cecidomyiidae)

          Ann Ent Soc Am 
          2004 
          97 
          940 
          948

        

          
            Johnstone RA 
            Hurst GDD 
           
          Maternally inherited male-killing microorganisms may confound interpretation of mtDNA variation in insects

          Biol J Linn Soc 
          1996 
          53 
          453 
          470

        

          
            Kambhampati S 
            Rai KS 
            Verleye DM 
           
          Frequencies of mitochondrial-DNA haplotypes in laboratory cage populations of the mosquito, Aedes albopictus

          Genetics 
          1992 
          132 
          205 
          209

          1398054 
        

          
            Keller GP 
            Windsor DM 
            Saucedo JM 
            Werren JH 
           
          Reproductive effects and geographical distributions of two Wolbachia strains infecting the Neotropical beetle, Chelymorpha alternans Boh. (Chrysomelidae, Cassidinae)

          Mol Ecol 
          2004 
          13 
          2405 
          2420

          15245413 
        

          
            Kondo R 
            Satta Y 
            Matsuura ET 
            Ishiwa H 
            Takahata N 
            Chigusa SI 
           
          Incomplete maternal transmission of mitochondrial-DNA in Drosophila

          Genetics 
          1990 
          126 
          657 
          663

          2249764 
        

          
            Lachaise D 
            Harry M 
            Solignac M 
            Lemeunier F 
            Benassi V 
            Cariou M-L 
           
          Evolutionary novelties in islands: Drosophila santomea, a new melanogaster sister species from Sã Tomé

          Proc R Soc B 
          2000 
          267 
          1487 
          1495

          (doi:10.1098/rspb.2000.1169.) 
        

          
            Marcade I 
            Souty-Grosset C 
            Bouchon D 
            Rigaud T 
            Raimond R 
           
          Mitochondrial DNA variability and Wolbachia infection in two sibling woodlice species

          Heredity 
          1999 
          83 
          71 
          78

          10447705 
        

          
            Marshall JM 
           
          The Allonemobius-Wolbachia host-endosymbiont system: evidence for rapid speciation and against reproductive isolation driven by cytoplasmic incompatibility

          Evolution 
          2004 
          58 
          2409 
          2425

          15612285 
        

          
            Marti OGJ 
            Rogers CE 
            Styer EL 
           
          Report of an intracellular bacterial symbiont in Noctuidonema guyanese, an ectoparasitic nematode of Spodoptera frugiperda

          J Invert Pathol 
          1995 
          66 
          94 
          96

        

          
            Maynard-Smith J 
            Haigh J 
           
          The hitch-hiking effect of a favourable gene

          Genet Res 
          1974 
          23 
          23 
          35

          4407212 
        

          
            Monnerot M 
            Solignac M 
            Wolstenholme DR 
           
          Discrepancy in divergence of the mitochondrial and nuclear genomes of Drosophila teissieri and Drosophila yakuba

          J Mol Evol 
          1990 
          30 
          500 
          508

          2115928 
        

          
            Ochman H 
            Elwyn S 
            Moran NA 
           
          Calibrating bacterial evolution

          Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
          1999 
          96 
          12 638 
          12 643

        

          
            Oliver KM 
            Russell JA 
            Moran NA 
            Hunter MS 
           
          Facultative bacterial symbionts in aphids confer resistance to parasitic wasps

          Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
          2003 
          100 
          1803 
          1807

          12563031 
        

          
            Reuter M 
            Keller L 
           
          High levels of multiple Wolbachia infection and recombination in the ant Formica exsecta

          Mol Biol Evol 
          2003 
          20 
          748 
          753

          12679529 
        

          
            Riegler M 
            Stauffer C 
           
          Wolbachia infections and superinfections in cytoplasmically incompatible populations of the European cherry fruit fly Rhagoletis cerasi (Diptera, Tephritidae)

          Mol Ecol 
          2002 
          11 
          2425 
          2434

          12406252 
        

          
            Rigaud T 
            Bouchon D 
            Souty-Grosset C 
            Raimond P 
           
          Mitochondrial DNA polymorphism, sex ratio distorters and population genetics in the isopod Armadillidium vulgare

          Genetics 
          1999 
          152 
          1669 
          1677

          10430591 
        

          
            Rokas A 
            Atkinson RJ 
            Brown GS 
            West SA 
            Stone GN 
           
          Understanding patterns of genetic diversity in the oak gallwasp Biorhiza pallida: demographic history or a Wolbachia selective sweep?

          Heredity 
          2001 
          87 
          294 
          304

          11737276 
        

          
            Rousset F 
            Solignac M 
           
          The evolution of single and double Wolbachia symbioses during speciation in the Drosphila simulans complex

          Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
          1995 
          92 
          6389 
          6393

          7604001 
        

          
            Rowley SM 
            Raven RJ 
            McGraw EA 
           
          Wolbachia pipientis in Australian spiders

          Curr Microbiol 
          2004 
          49 
          208 
          214

          15386106 
        

          
            Schulenburg J. H. G. v. d. 
            Hurst GDD 
            Tetzlaff D 
            Booth GE 
            Zakharov IA 
            Majerus MEN 
           
          History of infection with different male-killing bacteria in the two-spot ladybird beetle Adalia bipunctata revealed through mitochondrial DNA analysis

          Genetics 
          2002 
          160 
          1075 
          1086

          11901123 
        

          
            Shaw KL 
           
          Conflict between nuclear and mitochondrial DNA phylogenies of a recent species radiation: What mtDNA reveals and conceals about modes of speciation in Hawaiian crickets

          Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
          2002 
          99 
          16 122 
          16 127

        

          
            Shoemaker DD 
            Katju V 
            Jaenike J 
           
          Wolbachia and the evolution of reproductive isolation between Drosophila recens and Drosophila subquinaria

          Evolution 
          1999 
          53 
          1157 
          1164

        

          
            Shoemaker DD 
            Ross KG 
            Keller L 
            Vargo EL 
            Werren JH 
           
          Wolbachia infections in native and introduced populations of fire ants (Solenopsis spp.)

          Insect Mol Biol 
          2000 
          9 
          661 
          673

          11122476 
        

          
            Shoemaker DD 
            Machado CA 
            Molbo D 
            Werren JH 
            Windsor DM 
            Herre EA 
           
          The distribution of Wolbachia in fig wasps: correlations with host phylogeny, ecology and population structure

          Proc R Soc B 
          2002 
          269 
          2257 
          2267

          (doi:10.1098/rspb.2002.2100.) 
        

          
            Shoemaker DD 
            Keller G 
            Ross KG 
           
          Effects of Wolbachia on mtDNA variation in two fire ant species

          Mol Ecol 
          2003 
          12 
          1757 
          1771

          12803629 
        

          
            Shoemaker DD 
            Dyer KA 
            Ahrens M 
            McAbee K 
            Jaenike J 
           
          Decreased diversity but increased substitution rate in host mtDNA as a consequence of a Wolbachia endosymbiont infection

          Genetics 
          2004 
          168 
          2049 
          2058

          15611174 
        

          
            Sironi M 
            Bandi C 
            Sacchi L 
            Di Sacco B 
            Damiani G 
            Genchi C 
           
          A close relative of the arthropod endosymbiont Wolbachia in a filarial worm

          Mol Biochem Parasitol 
          1995 
          74 
          223 
          227

          8719164 
        

          
            Stouthamer R 
            Breeuwer JAJ 
            Hurst GDD 
           
          Wolbachia pipientis: microbial manipulator of arthropod reproduction

          Annu Rev Microbiol 
          1999 
          53 
          71 
          102

          10547686 
        

          
            Sun LV 
            Foster JM 
            Tzertzinis G 
            Ono M 
            Bandi C 
            Slatko BE 
            O'Neill SL 
           
          Determination of Wolbachia genome size by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis

          J Bacteriol 
          2001 
          183 
          2219 
          2225

          11244060 
        

          
            Tajima F 
           
          The effect of change in population-size on DNA polymorphism

          Genetics 
          1989a 
          123 
          597 
          601

          2599369 
        

          
            Tajima F 
           
          Statistical method for testing the neutral mutation hypothesis by DNA polymorphism

          Genetics 
          1989b 
          123 
          585 
          595

          2513255 
        

          
            Tamura K 
           
          The rate and pattern of nucleotide substitution in Drosophila mitochondrial-DNA

          Mol Biol Evol 
          1992 
          9 
          814 
          825

          1528108 
        

          
            Terry RS 
            
           
          Widespread vertical transmission and associated host sex-ratio distortion within the eukaryotic phylum Microspora

          Proc R Soc B 
          2004 
          271 
          1783 
          1789

          (doi:10.1098/rspb.2004.2793.) 
        

          
            Tsuchida T 
            Koga R 
            Shibao H 
            Matsumoto T 
            Fukatsu T 
           
          Diversity and geographic distribution of secondary endosymbiotic bacteria in natural populations of the pea aphid, Acyrthosiphon pisum

          Mol Ecol 
          2002 
          11 
          2123 
          2135

          12296954 
        

          
            Tsuchida T 
            Koga R 
            Fukatsu T 
           
          Host plant specialization governed by facultative symbiont

          Science 
          2004 
          303 
          1989 
          1989

          15044797 
        

          
            Turelli M 
            Hoffmann AA 
           
          Rapid spread of an inherited incompatibility factor in California Drosophila

          Nature 
          1991 
          353 
          440 
          442

          1896086 
        

          
            Turelli M 
            Hoffmann AA 
            McKechnie SW 
           
          Dynamics of cytoplasmic incompatibility and mtDNA variation in natural Drosophila simulans populations

          Genetics 
          1992 
          132 
          713 
          723

          1468627 
        

          
            Weeks AR 
            Velten R 
            Stouthamer R 
           
          Incidence of a new sex-ratio-distorting endosymbiotic bacterium among arthropods

          Proc R Soc B 
          2003 
          270 
          1857 
          1865

          (doi:10.1098/rspb.2003.2425.) 
        

          
            Wernegreen JJ 
           
          Genome evolution in bacterial endosymbionts of insects

          Nature Rev Gen 
          2002 
          3 
          850 
          861

        

          
            Werren JH 
            Windsor DM 
           
          Wolbachia infection frequencies in insects: evidence of a global equilibrium?

          Proc R Soc B 
          2000 
          267 
          1277 
          1285

          (doi:10.1098/rspb.2000. 1139.) 
        

          
            Werren JH 
            Zhang W 
            Guo LR 
           
          Evolution and phylogeny of Wolbachia: reproductive parasites of the arthropods

          Proc R Soc B 
          1995 
          261 
          55 
          71

        

